record_id: arxiv:2310.01444
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.01444
fetched_title: Adapting LLM Agents with Universal Feedback in Communi- cation
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:08:52Z

Adapting LLM Agents with Universal Feedback in Communi-
cation
Kuan Wang1, Yadong Lu 2, Michael Santacroce2, Yeyun Gong3,
Chao Zhang1, Yelong Shen2
1Georgia Institute of Technology 2Microsoft Azure AI 3Microsoft Research
{kuanwang, chaozhang}@gatech.edu
{yadonglu, misantac, yegong, yeshe }@microsoft.com
Abstract
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated
potential for LLM agents. To facilitate the training for these agents with
both linguistic feedback and non-linguistic reward signals, we introduce
Learning through Communication (LTC). We design a universal buffer to
store all the feedback, and an iterative pipeline to enable an LLM agent to
explore and update its policy in an given environment. To utilize our uni-
versal buffer for capturing agent interactions in various tasks, we introduce
diverse communication patterns tailored for both single-agent and multi-
agent environments. We evaluate the effectiveness of our LTC approach on
four diverse datasets: ALFWorld (single-agent), HotpotQA (multi-agent
collaboration), Chameleon (multi-agent competition), and GSM8k (multi-
agent teacher-student). On these datasets, LTC outperforms supervised
instruction fine-tuning baselines by 3.6% to 12%. These results demonstrate
the versatility and effectiveness of LTC in facilitating online adaptation for
LLM agents.
1 Introduction
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) Ouyang et al. (2022); Bubeck et al.
(2023); Wei et al. (2022a) have shed light on human-like LLM agents. In addition to design
prompting methods Wei et al. (2022b); Yao et al. (2023); Wu et al. (2023a), recent works also
focus on how to train the LLMs agent use linguistic feedback and non-linguistic reward
signals. The linguistic feedback is usually processed as instruction data to do Instruction
Fine-tuning (IFT) Chung et al. (2022); Lee et al. (2023); Honovich et al. (2022); Wang et al.
(2022e), while the non-linguistic reward signals are generally used to do alignment with
human preference Ouyang et al. (2022); Bai et al. (2022a); Stiennon et al. (2020); Leike et al.
(2018).
While some scenarios provide agents with heterogeneous feedback, existing methods can
only utilize the feedback partially. For instance, in multiplayer board role-playing games,
players generate a wealth of linguistic data, and the game concludes with definitive reward
signals indicating victory or defeat. Current approaches employ the linguistic data for IFT Li
et al. (2023); Micheli & Fleuret (2021), while the reward signals serve solely as a filtering
criterion to select the ILF data instead of the objective of reinforcement learning.
To address this gap, we propose a universal framework, named Learning through Commu-
nication (LTC), to train LLM agents with both linguistic feedback and non-linguistic reward
signals. We design a universal buffer to store all the feedback, and an iterative pipeline
to enable an LLM agent to explore and update its policy in an given environment. Each
iteration of LTC comprises two distinct phases: (1)Exploration: During this phase, the agent
interacts with the environments and other agents to gather diverse trajectories (linguistic)
and reward signals (non-linguistic) into the universal buffer. (2) Updating: In this phase, the
agent’s model is updated based on the collected data in the universal buffer. For updating,
LTC combines the language modeling loss and the PPO loss to strike a balance between
1
arXiv:2310.01444v3 [cs.CL] 14 Apr 2024

Few-shots
Agent
Prompt
Training-free
Inefficient Inference
Examples dependent
Prompting-free
Efficient Inference
Online learning
Trajectories
Reply buffers
Agent
Train
LTC
ICL
Env: You are in the middle of a room. Looking quickly
around you, you see a countertop, a fridge …
Your task is to: put an egg in the bowl.
Go to the countertop. Put the egg in the bowl.
Success, reward +1
An egg is more likely to appear in the fridge …
You need to find and take an egg first …
Open the fridge, I get an egg.
A bowl is more likely to appear on the counter…
Now you need to find the bowl and put the …
Env: You are in the middle of a room. Looking quickly
around you, you see a countertop, a fridge …
Your task is to: put an egg in the bowl.
Go to the countertop. Put the egg in the bowl.
Success, reward +1
Open the fridge, I get an egg.
Env: Let’s play the Chameleon. The topic is: Animals.
Secret word: Elephant (visible to chameleon players)
[P1, P3] reward +1
My clue is: It’s a smart mammal.
They can run fast.
It’s native to Africa and Asia.
I think it is P2. Their clue doesn’t fit as well.
I vote P1.
I vote P2. His clue doesn’t seem to fit …
Now vote who is the chameleon
P2
P1
P3
Accusation is correct. P2 can guess the secret word.
Accusation is correct. P2 can guess the secret word.
I guess the secret word is cheetah.
(chameleon)
[P2] reward -1
Trajectories
Agent
Train
Prompting-free
Single-agent Multi-agent
An egg is more likely to appear in the fridge …
I need to find and take an egg first …
A bowl is more likely to appear on the counter…
Now I need to find the bowl and put the …
2
Figure 1: The LTC framework is adept for both single-agent and multi-agent environ-
ments. Within these environments, agents have the capability to persistently engage in
exploration and interaction to collect trajectories through various communication patterns.
Concurrently, LTC facilitates the training of these agents utilizing the data acquired from
their exploratory activities. This process enables the agents to autonomously adapt to their
respective environments, negating the necessity for human supervision.
language consistency and reward signals As the pivot of the iterative pipeline, the replay
buffer is updated after each exploration phase, and a subset of the buffer is sampled for the
updating phase.
To universally supports linguistic feedback and non-linguistic reward signals during com-
munication, we design the replay buffer structure as a trajectory of tokens sequences
(Figure 2). Such a replay buffer structure is applicable to diverse tasks, including single-
agent and multi-agent environments. To facilitate collecting trajectories with linguistic data
and reward signals, we devised three communication patterns: (1) Single-agent Monologue:
This pattern allows a single agent to collect trajectories contain linguistic data and receive
reward signals from the environments. (2) Multi-agent Dialogue: This pattern enables
multiple agents to interact with each other and external tools to collect linguistic data, and
utilize reward signals provided by the environments. (3) T eacher-student Dialogue: This
variant of multi-agent dialogue that collect the linguistic feedback and non-linguistic reward
signals provided by a teacher agent instead of the environment.
We evaluate LTC method on several representative datasets: ALFWorld for decision-making,
HotpotQA for knowledge-intensive reasoning, andGSM8k for numerical reasoning. Through-
out these experiments, LTC consistently outperforms the baselines. In ALFWorld, LTC
outperforms the strong instruction tuning baseline by 12% on success rate, even in the
challenging Pick 2 task. This shows that our communication mechanism enables the agent
to learn from its experiences for task solving. OnHotpotQA, LTC outperforms the instruction
tuning baseline by 5% on EM score, and our Llama-7B based agent even obtains slightly
better (0.6%) performance than the ReAct-Tuning baseline which uses 9× larger PaLM-62B
model. On GSM8k, LTC also beats the CoT-Tuning baseline by 3.6% on accuracy. These
results highlight the adaptability and effectiveness of LTC approach across varied domains.
Our key contributions are:
1. Learning through Communication (LTC) : We propose a universal framework,
named Learning through Communication (LTC), to train LLM agents with both
linguistic feedback and non-linguistic reward signals . We design a universal
buffer to store all the feedback, and an iterative pipeline to enable an LLM agent to
explore and update its policy in an given environment.
2. Task-specific Communication Patterns: The LTC paradigm allows for flexible
design of communication patterns tailored to different tasks. We introduce three
specific patterns: Single-agent Monologue, Multi-agent Dialogue, and Teacher-
student Dialogue. These patterns can be combined to generate diverse structured
interactions and feedback signals for agent training, catering to various task types.
3. Empirical Study and Findings: We conduct rigorous experiments on public bench-
mark tasks to demonstrate the effectiveness of LTC. Our results indicate that LTC
can be a superior approach compared to instruction-tuning or prompting baselines.
2

Figure 2: The buffer data is a serial of integer/float sequences. We treat each token id as
the action in our reinforcement learning formula. We also save its corresponding mask
indicating the source of the token, the value from the critic model, the log-prob indicating
the log-likelihood when sampling the action and the reward from the environment/other
agents.
2 Related Work
2.1 Instruction Tuning
Instruction tuning (IT) is an important technique for improving the capabilities and con-
trollability of LLMs Radford et al. (2019); Brown et al. (2020); Wei et al. (2022a); Qin et al.
(2023); OpenAI (2023); Chowdhery et al. (2022); Touvron et al. (2023). Many studies have
been dedicated to instruction data generation and selection Chung et al. (2022); Wang et al.
(2022e); Lee et al. (2023). For instance, Unnatural Instructions Honovich et al. (2022) is cre-
ated by using the Super-Natural Instructions dataset Wang et al. (2022f) as a seed to prompt
InstructGPT Ouyang et al. (2022). Self-Instruct Wang et al. (2022e) employs a recursive
pipeline that generates instruction data from hand-crafted seed tasks using ChatGPT Ope-
nAI (2022). Other studies focus on fine-tuning pre-trained LLMs with instruction data.
BLOOMZ Muennighoff et al. (2022) is initialized with BLOOM Scao et al. (2022) and then
fine-tuned using the xP3 instruction dataset Muennighoff et al. (2022). Flan-T5 is initialized
with T5 Raffel et al. (2020) and fine-tuned with the FLAN dataset Longpre et al. (2023).
Additionally, after the release of LLaMA Touvron et al. (2023), many works have utilized it
as the base model for instruction tuning, such as Alpaca Taori et al. (2023), Vicuna Chiang
et al. (2023), and GPT-4-LLM Peng et al. (2023). Some papers explore alignment fine-tuning
using RLHF Ouyang et al. (2022); Bai et al. (2022a); Stiennon et al. (2020); Leike et al. (2018).
InstructGPT Ouyang et al. (2022) employs GPT-3 for supervised fine-tuning on a human-
filtered instruction dataset, followed by training a reward model and using PPO Schulman
et al. (2017) for RLHF. Claude investigates RLHF Bai et al. (2022a) and constitutional ap-
proaches Bai et al. (2022b) for making LLMs both harmless and helpful. DPO Rafailov
et al. (2023) fine-tunes the LLMs to align with human preferences by directly optimizing a
classification problem on preference data instead of RLHF. While these prominent research
works focus on aligning LLMs for general instruction-following, our objective is to adapt
LLM agents for specific tasks or environments.
2.2 LLM Agents
LLMs have demonstrated the potential to act as advanced agents Ouyang et al. (2022);
Bubeck et al. (2023); Wei et al. (2022a), and significant progress has been made in developing
versatile LLM agents Weng (2023); Sumers et al. (2023); Park et al. (2023); Liu et al. (2023a);
Lin et al. (2023); Xu et al. (2023) and benchmarks Wang et al. (2022a); Deng et al. (2023);
Liu et al. (2023b). For planning, Chain-of-Thought (CoTWei et al. (2022b)) prompts the
model to think step by step, by decomposing complex tasks into smaller and simpler steps.
Self Consistency (Wang et al., 2022c;d) extends CoT by using ensembles of predictions to
improve consistency of the LLM. Inner Monologue Huang et al. (2022b) leverages envi-
ronment feedback to enhance LLMs’ planning and processing capabilities in embodied
robotics tasks without extra training. ReAct Yao et al. (2023) integrates reasoning and action
taking, expanding the action space to include both task-specific discrete actions and lan-
guage. Reflexion Shinn et al. (2023) equips agents with dynamic memory and self-reflection
capabilities to improve reasoning by using continuous trials in the same environment as
feedback. Recent research has also shown that LLMs can be augmented as an autonomous
agent to use external tools to solve problems in interactive environments. These techniques
include retrieval augmentation Shi et al. (2023); Yao et al. (2023); Izacard et al. (2022), math
tools Schick et al. (2023); Yao et al. (2023); Lu et al. (2023), and code interpreters Gao et al.
(2022); Wang et al. (2022b). Prior works also have explored using multiple LLMs in a
collaborative setting to solve complex tasks Hong et al. (2023); Qian et al. (2023); Li et al.
3

Replay Buffers
Collect
GPT-3
GPT-4
Llama-2
GPT-3GPT-4
Llama-2
GPT-3
Environments
GPT-4
Replay Buffers
Exploration Phase
…
Llama-2
GPT-3
Agent
Environments
GPT-4
Interact
Interact
GPU3
Llama-2
GPT-3
Agent
Environments
GPT-4
Interact
Interact
GPU2
Llama-2
GPT-3
Agent
Environments
GPT-4
Interact
Interact
GPU1
LLM
Pre-trained
Reinforcement learning
Collect
Trajectories
Train
Agent
Policy
Update
Policy
Exploration Phase Updating Phase
Initialize
2
Figure 3: LTC has an iterative two-phase framework. During the exploration phase, the
agent proactively explores new environments and communicates with other agents, gather-
ing the trajectories to update the replay buffer. Then the agent is trained for updating the
policy in the updating phase.
(2023); Wang et al. (2023); Talebirad & Nadiri (2023); Akata et al. (2023). Open-source
projects like AutoGPT Significant-Gravitas (2023), GPT-Engineer AntonOsika (2023), and
BabyAGI yoheinakajima (2023) also showcase the potential of LLM not just in generating
content but also as a general problem solver. Most of the above methods are based on either
human-designed few-shot prompting examples, or finetuning with pre-collected instruction
datasets. Our LTC is not a few-shot prompting method and we focus on adapting the agent
by collecting training data automatically by exploration.
3 Learning Through Communication
We design Learning Through Communication (LTC), an iterative training method for LLM
agents to continuously adapt to new environments. As shown in Figure 3, LTC iterates
between two phases: (1) An exploration phase where agents can interact with new envi-
ronments and other agents to collect trial data with feedback, and (2) a updating phrase to
fine-tune the agent to update the policy.
3.1 Exploration Phase
At the start of each iteration, the agent explores the environments to get the trajectories
and the reward signal data. We denote these data as a tuple: S = (T ,M,R), where
T ={t1, t2, . . ., tn} represents the text data generated by the communication process during
agent exploration,M ={m1, m2, . . ., mn} with mi∈{ 0, 1, 2} indicates the source of the
text data (system or agents),R ={r1, r2, . . ., rn} with ri∈{− 1, 0, 1} represents the reward
signals provided by either the system or the agents. We demonstrate the the details of this
data structure in Figure 2,M is the mask list, andR is the reward list. In PPO training,
both the value list and the log-prob list correspond directly to the action list. For brevity, we
denote these three lists together asT here. Please see Appendix A.2 for more detaills.
To collect the trajectories dataS = (T ,M,R) from different types of tasks, we design the
communication patterns for these tasks. Here we provide three communication patterns:
• Single-agent Monologue : Single-agent Monologue is a single-agent soliloquy
style communication pattern, designed for general instruction following tasks
(Algorithm 1). It split the tasks into step by step like ReAct and CoT, and their own
trajectories with system rewards are collected to train themselves at the same time
with their exploration. Figure 1 left is a toy example of ALFWorld to demonstrate
the Monologue pattern with a single agent. This agent soliloquizes to think the
situation and take the actions to explore the environment and finally get the reward
provided by the environment. This pattern is based on the think and act steps in the
ReAct formulation Yao et al. (2023), we design the training buffer collection process
to make it aligh with our reinforcement learning formulation.
• Multi-agent Dialogue: Multi-agent Dialogue is a multi-agent discussion style
pattern (Algorithm 2). It is designed for multi-agent collaborating and competing
tasks, where multiple agents will play their role by speaking or taking actions in a
certain order and a final reward will be given by the environment based on the
4

Collect
Reinforce learning
Prompt
Env: You are in the middle of a room. Looking quickly
around you, you see a countertop, a fridge …
Your task is to: put an egg in the bowl.
I need to find and take an egg first, then …
An egg is more likely to appear in the fridge …
Open the fridge, I get an egg. Now I need to
find the bowl and put the egg into it …
A bowl is more likely to appear on the counter…
Go to the countertop. Put the egg in the bowl.
Success, reward +1
Few-shots Reply buffers
Prompt Train
ICL
Collected trails
AgentAgent
Training-free Prompting-free
Efficient InferenceInefficient Inference
Examples dependent Continual learning
LTC
LoRA
Your task is to: provide a detailed answer so user don't
need to search outside to understand the answer …
Question: Shawn has five toys. For Christmas, he got two
new toys each from his mom and dad. How many toys
does he have now?
Shawn started with 5 toys. If he got 2 new toys
then that is 5+2=7. The answer is 7.
Sarah started with 9 pens. If she gives 3 pens to
Bob and 3 pens to Tom, then that is 9-3-3=3.
The answer is 3.
It’s incorrect. If he got 2 toys from his mom and
2 toys from his dad, then that is 5+2+2=9.
Now take this homework problem: Sarah has 9
pens, and she gives 3 pens to each of Bob and
Tom. How many pens does Sarah have left?
Correct! You have learnt this type of questions.
Success, reward +1
Fail, reward -1
Signal from GPT
Your task is to: solve a question answering task with
interleaving Thought, Action, Observation steps …
Question: Were Pavel Urysohn and Leonid Levin known
for the same type of work?
Search[Pavel Urysohn]
I need to search Pavel Urysohn and Leonid
Levin, find their types of work, then find …
Pavel Samuilovich Urysohn was a Soviet …
Leonid Anatolievich Levin is a Soviet-American
mathematician and computer scientist.
Search[Leonid Levin]
Pavel Urysohn is a mathematician. I need to
search Leonid Levin next and find its type …
Finish[yes]
Leonid Levin is a mathematician and computer
scientist. So they have the same type of work.
Success, reward +1
Can replace when testing
Env: You are in the middle of a room. Looking quickly
around you, you see a countertop, a fridge …
Your task is to: put an egg in the bowl.
I need to find and take an egg first, then …
An egg is more likely to appear in the fridge …
Open the fridge, I get an egg. Now I need to
find the bowl and put the egg into it …
A bowl is more likely to appear on the counter…
Go to the countertop. Put the egg in the bowl.
Success, reward +1
1
Figure 4: The toy examples to demonstrate communication patterns: 1) the left figure is
the Multi-agent Dialogue pattern, where two agent play different roles to collaborate on
the task. The thinker agent is responsible for analyzing the situation and give suggestion
to the actor agent who is responsible for making decisions. We can just assign the LTC
agent to play the thinker agent when testing without GPT-4 agent. 2) the right figure is the
Teacher-student Dialogue pattern, where the student agent starts with an initial answer to
the current question, and then the teacher directly corrects the answer with a reward. To
help the student improve ability instead of just memorizing the solution, the teacher will
generate another analogous question to ask the student. Eventually, the student gives a new
answer for this analogous question and gets a new reward signal from the teacher.
performance of the agents. The left figure of Figure 4 is a toy example of HotpotQA
to illustrate this pattern for collaborating, where the GPT-4 agent play as a thinker
to analyze the situation and give suggestions to the actor agent who is responsible
for making decisions. The reward in HotpotQA is the correctness of the answer
obtained by two agents. And we can use their communication data to train the LTC
agents do both thinker and actor so that they can learn how to cooperate with each
other to solve the task. The right figure of Figure 1 is a toy example of Multi-agent
Dialogue for a competing game task Chameleon, where three agents play different
roles. The reward is the win or loss of the game, so they need do with deduction
and bluffing in the communication process to win the game. And their games
trajectories will be use in LTC iterations to boost the agents.
• Teacher-student Dialogue: Teacher-student Dialogue is a teacher-student style
pattern for powerful agents to teach the novice agents (Algorithm 3). We design
this pattern for complex analytical tasks such as numerical reasoning, which require
extensive analytical examples for agents to improve the specific reasoning ability
lacking in the pretrained models. Teacher-student Dialogue pattern has two roles
(student and teacher) played by two agents, however, in addition to the linguistic
feedback, the teacher roles can directly provide the non-linguistic reward signals,
which are all provided by the system (environments) in the previous pattern. The
right figure of Figure 4 is a toy example with GSM8k to demonstrate how the
student agent communicates with the teacher agent in a homework-correcting style.
In the math question environment, the student agent starts with an initial answer to
the current question, then the teacher directly corrects the answer with a reward.
To help the student improve ability instead of just memorizing the solution, the
teacher will generate another individual question and provide a new reward to the
student.
3.2 Updating phase
In the updating phase, the LLM agent model could be optimized through the conversation
sessions collected in the exploration stage. Given a example session S = (T ,M,R), we
mainly utilize two training objects for model training.
• Language model Objective:LLM encourages the model to learn from the trajectory
T , serving as an unsupervised learning schema to help model for behavior cloning
from other agents’ response or predicting system feedbacks.
5

• Reinforcement Objective:Lreinforce optimizes the model by maximizing the expecta-
tion reward provided by environment or a teacher agent (i.e., GPT-4 OpenAI (2023)).
It is an goal-oriented objective, and allows the model to learn through both positive
and negative signals in the communication session.
Thus, the overall training objective for LTC combines the above two terms:
LLTC(S) = βLLM(T ) +Lreinforce(S), (1)
where β is a balancing hyper-parameter. The off-policy PPO algorithm Schulman et al.
(2017) is utilized for optimizingLreinforce(S), and it can be further breakdown into policy
loss, value loss and policy entropy regularization terms in implementation. The vanilla PPO
algorithm takes the triplet (state, action, rewards) for training. In this case, we sample from
the trajectories (T<i, ti) for simulating the state-action pairs, specifically, we only keep the
tokens generated by agent model itself as actions for policy updating.
4 Experiments
4.1 Datasets
We conducted experiments on four datasets: ALFWorld (Shridhar et al., 2020b), Hot-
potQA (Yang et al., 2018), Chameleon Wu et al. (2023b) andGSM8k (Cobbe et al., 2021). Each
of these datasets represents a different environment type, namely single-agent, multi-agent
collaborating, multi-agent competing, and teacher-student, respectively. And different com-
munication patterns are used: Single-agent Monologue for ALFWorld, Multi-agent Dialogue
for HotpotQA and Chameleon Wu et al. (2023b), and Teacher-student Dialogue forGSM8k.
ALFWorld ALFWorld (Figure 1) is a text-based game that follows the ALFRED bench-
mark (Shridhar et al., 2020a). In this game, agents are presented with six types of tasks that
involve navigating a simulated household environment using textual actions. With over
50 locations to explore, these tasks demand strategic planning and thorough exploration.
Following (Shridhar et al., 2020b), we utilize the train set that consists of 3553 environments
for training our model and the baselines; and we use the unseen test set that comprises 134
environments for evaluatation.
HotpotQA HotpotQA is a question-answering dataset that focuses on multi-hop reasoning
based supporting facts, with the goal of improving the explainability of QA systems. In
this dataset, agents are required to reason across two or more Wikipedia passages to derive
answers. We initialize the environments using only the text of the questions, meaning
that agents are provided with the question and task description but do not have access to
supporting paragraphs. To support their reasoning, agents must either rely on their internal
knowledge or interact with an external Wikipedia tool to retrieve the necessary information.
For training, we sample the environments from the training set, which consists of 90,447
QA-pairs. For evaluation, we run 500 random examples from the test set, following (Yao
et al., 2023).
Chameleon Chameleon is a multi-player social deduction game environment implemented
by the ChatArena Wu et al. (2023b). There are two roles in the game, chameleon and non-
chameleon. The topic of the secret word will be first revealed to all the players. Then
the secret word will be revealed to non-chameleons. Non-chameleons try to identify the
chameleon without giving away the secret word, while the chameleon tries to blend in and
guess the word. The game involves giving clues, voting on who the chameleon might be,
and a final guess from the accused chameleon. We use [3, 4, 5] players setting to train and
test the agents’ performance.
GSM8k The GSM8k dataset is a collection of 8.5K math problems for grade school students.
These problems have been crafted by human experts to ensure linguistic diversity. The
dataset is divided into two sets: 7.5K problems for training and 1K problems for testing.
Each problem in the dataset requires 2 to 8 steps of reasoning to arrive at the solution. The
problems primarily focus on fundamental arithmetic operations like addition, subtraction,
multiplication, and division.
6

4.2 Settings
Model Architecture We use a modified version of Llama Touvron et al. (2023) as the
base model. To generate state values corresponding to the action tokens, we introduce an
additional linear layer to serve ast the value head. This value head acts as an auxiliary
output module, and the output values are processed using the tanh () function to ensure
they fall within the range of (-1, 1). This adaptation for RL has also been discussed in prior
studies Santacroce et al. (2023).
Agent Pre-training We use the Llama-7B model (Touvron et al., 2023) for our LLM agent.
To enhance the agent’s ability to follow task-specific instructions, we initialize it by instruc-
tion fine-tuning (IT). And this initialized agent works as the baseline for a fair compari-
son. This step is crucial because the original Llama-7B model, without prior instruction
fine-tuning, struggled to follow task instructions and generation sensible actions in the
environments. To collect data for instruction fine-tuning, we employ GPT3/4 as our agent to
explore the environments created from the training set. We then filter out negative examples
and retain positive examples to train the initial agent. For both the ALFWorld and HotpotQA
datasets, we leverage GPT3 (specifically, text-davinci-003). However, for the GSM8k dataset,
we use GPT4 due to GPT3’s inadequate performance in handling mathematical problems,
which resulted in a scarcity of positive examples.
Training details We utilize the AdamW optimizer (Loshchilov & Hutter, 2017) with a batch
size of 32. The learning rate is set to 2e-4. In each iteration, the sizes of new environments
for agents to explore are: 256 for ALFWorld, 512 for GSM8k, and 1024 for HotpotQA. For
parameter-efficient fine-tuning, we employ LoRA Hu et al. (2021) with hyperparameters
R = 16 and α = 16. For distributed training, we utilize 4 nodes with 8 ×A100 GPUs on
HotpotQA and GSM8k. For the experiments on ALFWorld, we use 1 node with 2×A100 GPUs
due to the dataset’s small scale.
Baselines We compare the agents trained by LTC with existing prompting and instruction
tuning methods, including ReAct (Yao et al., 2023), ReAct-IM (Huang et al., 2022b), CoT (Wei
et al., 2022b), CoT-SC (Wang et al., 2022c;d), BUTLER Micheli & Fleuret (2021). The detailed
of these baselines are described in Appendix A.7. Most of these methods focus on few-shot
prompting, and different pre-trained models are used. To ensure a fair comparison, we
include the additional baselines named ReAct-Tuning and CoT-Tuning by fine-tuning the
Llama-7B model using the collected trajectories as fine-tuning data. In addition, GPT-4 are
not used in the test time, and all the results reported are obtained by the trained agent itself.
4.3 Results
Method \ Task Pick Clean Heat Cool Look Pick 2 All
ReAct (avg) 65 39 83 76 55 24 57
ReAct (best of 6) 92 58 96 86 78 41 71
ReAct-IM (avg) 55 59 60 55 23 24 48
ReAct-IM (best of 6) 62 68 87 57 39 33 53
BUTLERg (best of 8) 33 26 70 76 17 12 22
BUTLER (best of 8) 46 39 74 100 22 24 37
ReAct-Tuning (avg) 83 91 91 90 72 8 77
ReAct-Tuning (best of 3) 92 97 96 95 78 24 78
LTC (avg) 89 91 93 97 96 67 90
LTC (best of 3) 92 97 96 100 100 76 91
Table 1: AlfWorld success rates (%) for 6 tasks.
The results of the bottom block are obtained by fine-
tuning Llama-7B model.
ALFWorld As shown in Table 1,
LTC outperforms the previous best
methods* on all of tasks ofALFWorld.
We can see that Instruction Fine-
tuning is already a strong baseline
outperforming others, yet our LTC
achieves a success rate of 91%, re-
markably outperforming the best In-
struction Tuning baseline (78%). No-
tably, on both Cool and Look tasks,
LTC obtains a 100% success rate.
Even on the hardest Pick Two &
Place task (e.g., “put two pencils in
the drawer”), it achieves a decent 76% success rate. The Pick Two task requires the agent
to perform two sequences of ”pick and place” actions in one task, while keeping track of
the desired type and the location. The combined sequences and the need to remember
the previous location make this task challenging. This may be the reason why baselines
achieve lower success rates on this task. In contrast, our LTC agent, which further trains the
*For ALFWorld, ReAct and ReAct-IM results are from Table 3 of Yao et al. (2023). BUTLER and
BUTLERg results are from Table 4 of Shridhar et al. (2020b), and they are trained with DAgger Ross
et al. (2011).
7

agent with self-exploration significantly outperforms other agents. This underscores the
effectiveness of the communication mechanism in LTC.
Model Method EM score
PaLM-540B
CoT (Wei et al., 2022b) 29.4
CoT-SC (Wang et al., 2022c) 33.4
ReAct (Yao et al., 2023) 27.4
ReAct→ CoT-SC 35.1
GPT3-175B ReAct 30.8
PaLM-62B ReAct-Tuning 32.6
CoT-Tuning 25.2
PaLM-8B ReAct-Tuning 25.0
CoT-Tuning 14.0
Llama-7B ReAct-Tuning 28.2
LTC(single-agent monologue) 31.0
LTC(multi-agent dialogue) 33.2
Llama2-13B ReAct-Tuning 33.8
LTC(multi-agent dialogue) 35.8
Table 2: EM scores on HotpotQA
with prompt and tuning methods.
Methods that use fine-tuning are
marked by “-Tuning”.
HotpotQA As shown in Table 2, LTC outperforms
the instruction tuning baseline † by 5% on Exact
Match (EM) score, and it even outperforms ReAct
and CoT on their default settings. Note that Re-
Act and CoT use PaLM-540B and GPT3-175B as
the pre-trained LM model, which is 77x and 25x
larger than our the Llama-7B model we used. By
sampling 21 CoT trajectories during inference and
adopting the majority answer, CoT-SC is slightly
better (0.2%) than LTC, and their combined method
ReAct→ CoT-SC surpasses LTC by 1.9%. Com-
pared to other models with tuning, our Llama-7B
based agent even obtains slightly better (0.6%) per-
formance than the ReAct-Tuning baseline with 9×
larger PaLM-62B model.
Chameleon As shown in Table 3, LTC outper-
forms the instruction tuning baselines by 3.1% on
winning rate against GPT-4 players. In the training,
all the players are played by the same Llama2-7B
model that we are training. While in the testing, to get the winning rate of our trained agent
against GPT4, only 1 player is randomly picked to use our trained agent as backend, and
other players are played by GPT4. We could see that the LTC agents winning rate improves
with the increasing of number of players, we explain this by the more players, the higher
chance that the GPT4 players carry the game.
Method \ #players n=3 n=4 n=5 overall
Llama-Tuning 20.8 20.3 23.8 21.9
Llama-LTC 22.9 23.4 27.5 25.0
Table 3: Chameleon game winning rates
(%) of different numbers of players.
GSM8k As shown in Table 4, LTC (teacher-student
dialogue) outperforms the instruction fine-tuning
baseline by 3.6% on accuracy, and it surpasses
the LTC (single-agent monologue) baseline, which does
not use the reward and feedback from GPT-4.
Model Method Accuracy
PaLM-540B CoT (Wei et al., 2022b) 56.5
CoT-SC (Wang et al., 2022c) 74.4
GPT3-175B CoT (Wei et al., 2022b) 60.1
CoT-SC (Wang et al., 2022c) 78.0
Llama-7B CoT (Touvron et al., 2023) 11.0
CoT-SC (Touvron et al., 2023) 18.1
Llama-7B
CoT-Tuning 37.7
LTC(single-agent monologue) 39.6
LTC(teacher-student dialogue) 41.3
Table 4: Accuracy on GSM8k. The re-
sults of the bottom block are obtained
by fine-tuning, while the others are
prompting methods.
However, LTC underperforms CoT and CoT-SC
with the much larger models (PaLM-540B and
GPT3-175B). This phenomenon is because numer-
ical reasoning requires a larger model size and suf-
ficient pretraining data, as observed in OpenAI
(2023). Unfortunately, due to computational re-
source limitations, we can only train the relatively
small Llama-7B model but were unable to train
larger-scale models. Nevertheless, we believe that
exploring LTC with larger models is promising for
future research.
5 Discussion
Shortcuts One interesting observation is that the
GPT-4 agent sometimes employs ”shortcuts” to solve problems when serving as a teacher
to generate new training data. These shortcuts rely on the internal knowledge acquired
during its pretraining process. To illustrate this, we present a case study from HotpotQA
in Figure 7. In this case, the GPT-4 agent quickly retrieves the answer by leveraging its
memorized knowledge about the second entry after receiving the Wikipedia page of the
first entry. On the other hand, the bottom of Figure 7 demonstrates a comparison with
LLaMA-7B, which was trained using our LTC method with the GPT-4 agent in the loop.
†For HotPotQA, Prompting method results without fine-tuning are from Table 1&5 of Yao et al.
(2023). PaLM-8B and PaLM-62B scores are estimates from Figure 3 of Yao et al. (2023).
8

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
N iter
0.65
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90Acc
Iterative PPO Alfworld Acc
w/ PPO&Interaction
w/o PPO
w/o Interaction
Figure 5: The accuracy curves of training.
0 1000 2000 3000 4000
N episode
0.00
0.05
0.10
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35Loss
Alfworld Loss
LM loss
Value loss
Policy loss Figure 6: The loss curves of training.
LLaMA-7B does not employ shortcuts and instead performs a search for the second entry.
This case study demonstrates that communication mechanism in LTC provide additional
benefits during learning, compared to soley relying on data generated by GPT-4.
Method GSM8k Hotpot-QA Alfworld
(CoT) (ReAct) (ReAct)
ICL 836 1937 1744
LTC 107 167 189
Table 5: Average number of tokens of the
input prompts on test sets. LTC does not
use any few shot examples in the prompt,
hence uses only a fraction of tokens com-
pared to ICL.
Efficiency As mentioned above, prompting-
based methods such as ReAct (Yao et al., 2023)
and CoT (Wei et al., 2022b) use a subset of ex-
emplary trajectories from the given task as
few-shot prompts during inference. How-
ever, these few-shot prompts are often long,
which leads to increased inference cost and
limited context length for user queries. As
shown in Table 5, we compare the number
of input tokens for each task. We compute
the CoT prompts for GSM8k, and we use Re-
Act for the other two tasks. All the few-shot
prompts are sourced from the original paper.
As shown, our LTC agents used only 12.8%, 8.6%, and 10.8% of the input tokens required by
the ICL methods on the three tasks, respectively.
Ablation We conducted ablation studies on the loss design of LTC. Figure 5 illustrates the
success rate of agents on the ALFWorld dataset under different loss settings. Without using
our communication pattern for interactions and merely sampling pre-collected instruction
data for training, the improvement was limited. However, when we incorporated our
communication pattern to gather data, the model’s performance quickly surpassed 80%.
Furthermore, employing PPO loss to handle positive and negative samples separately
resulted in faster and more significant improvement (blue line). In Figure 6, we present the
separate curves of the three main losses during training. Initially, the LM loss showed a
decreasing trend. Interestingly, as training iterations progressed, both the value loss and
policy loss gradually decreased, which possibly causes the LM loss to increase temporarily.
After the value loss and policy loss reached a certain threshold, the LM loss continued to
decrease till convergence.
6 Conclusion
We introduced Learning-Through-Communication (LTC), a paradigm that adapts LLM
agents to new tasks and environments via communication-based iterative learning. Within
this LTC framework, we have designed three communication modes for common tasks
including decision-making, knowledge-intensive reasoning, and numeric reasoning. These
communication modes facilitate interactions between LLM agents and their environments,
as well as other agents such as GPT-4 and humans. The history of these interactions can
be autonomously organized into training data for PPO training so that the agent can adapt
to the new task. Our approach represents a closed loop where the agent self-interacts
with the environment or other agents, and learning to improve itself with minimal human
intervention. Empirically, we have demonstrated that LTC performs strongly in success rate
and efficiency across four different tasks: AlfWorld, HotpotQA, Chameleon, and GSM8k. It
consistently outperforms existing LLM agent and instruction tuning baselines, showing the
promise of the LTC paradigm in adapting LLM agents to new tasks and environments with
9

minimal human effort. As for future work, we plan to explore more diverse communication
patterns for different tasks, and involve the communication with human during the iterative
learning process. We will open source our code to facilitate further research in this line.
