record_id: arxiv:2605.09539
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.09539
fetched_title: TacoMAS: Test-Time Co-Evolution of Topology and Capability in LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:43Z

TacoMAS: Test-Time Co-Evolution of Topology
and Capability in LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems
Chen Xu1 Yicheng Hu2 Ruizi Wang2 Xinyu Lin3B Wenjie Wang2B Dongrui Liu4 Fuli Feng2
1Carnegie Mellon University 2University of Science and Technology of China
3National University of Singapore 4Shanghai AI Lab
chenxu0427ruc@gmail.com, xylin1028@gmail.com, wenjiewang96@gmail.com
Multi-agent systems (MAS) have emerged as a promising paradigm for solving complex tasks.
Recent work has explored self-evolving MAS that automatically optimize agent capabilities or
communication topologies. However, existing methods either learn a topology that remains
fixed at inference time or adapt only topology or capability during inference. We empirically
and theoretically show that effective test-time evolution requires jointly adapting both axes, but
on different time scales: capabilities should update rapidly to handle emerging subtasks, while
the topology should evolve more slowly to preserve coordination stability. We then introduce
TacoMAS, a test-time co-evolution framework for dynamic MAS. TacoMAS formulates MAS
inference as a task of online graph adaptation, where nodes represent agents with role-specific
capability and edges define their communication topology. During inference, a fast capability
loop updates agent expertise using trajectory-level feedback, while a slow meta-LLM-driven
topology loop performs agents’ birth-death operations on MAS, including edge edit, agent
addition, and agent removal. We further show that this fast–slow design drives MAS evolution
toward a task-conditioned stable equilibrium. Experiments on four benchmarks demonstrate
that TacoMAS outperforms nearly 20 multi-agent baselines, achieving an average improvement
of 13.3% over the strongest baseline.
GitHub:https://github.com/chenxu2-gif/TacoMAS-MultiAgent
B Corresponding authors.
1. Introduction
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have enabled increasingly capable autonomous
agents, yet many real-world problems remain too complex for a single agent to solve reliably (Guo
et al., 2024; Händler, 2023; Wang et al., 2024). Tasks such as software engineering, retrieval-intensive
analysis, and long-horizon planning often require decomposing a problem into multiple interdepen-
dent subtasks. Multi-agent systems (MAS) provide a natural solution by coordinating specialized
agents with different roles and capabilities. However, their effectiveness depends critically on how
agents are organized and how responsibilities are allocated. Therefore, a growing line of research
argues that the topology and capabilities of MAS should not be manually fixed, but automatically
optimized or evolved for different tasks (Li et al., 2024; Piccialli et al., 2025).
Previous work on evolving MAS can be broadly divided into training-time and test-time
approaches. Training-time methods optimize the agent topology or role assignment once and keep
it fixed during inference (Hong et al., 2023; Hu et al., 2024; Shang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025; Zhang
et al., 2024). However, because the learned topology is fixed, it can easily mismatch unseen tasks
whose latent subtasks and coordination demands deviate from the training distribution. Test-time
arXiv:2605.09539v1 [cs.CL] 10 May 2026

TacoMAS: Test-Time Co-Evolution of Topology and Capability in LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems
methods instead treat inference as a dynamic evolution process, allowing MAS to adjust online
based on intermediate states (Qian et al., 2024; Qu et al., 2026; Tastan et al., 2026). However, existing
methods typically evolve either the communication topology (Qian et al., 2024; Tastan et al., 2026)
or agent capabilities (Qu et al., 2026) alone. In fact, optimizing both aspects is essential; it is a key
prerequisite for unlocking the full collaborative potential of MAS (Kim et al., 2025). This raises a
question: how can we jointly adapt both topology and capabilities of MAS during inference?
However, naively combining these directions by updating both topology and capability online
is problematic (Papoudakis and et.al, 2021). Evolving the two at the same pace can cause local
adaptation to destabilize global coordination (see the theoretical and empirical evidence in § 4.3
and 5.3, respectively). For example, when an intermediate error is detected, a verifier agent may
need to rapidly strengthen its checking capability. But if the topology is simultaneously rewired, the
evidence flow and role dependencies underpinning the verifier agent may shift, turning a useful
local update into a system-level failure. This motivates a natural fast–slow separation (Fabiano
et al., 2021; Mguni et al., 2023), in which capability evolves on the fast timescale and topology on
the slow one.
This fast-slow separation is not merely an engineering choice, but follows from evolutionary
game theory. We model capability evolution as replicator dynamics over agent strategies and
topology evolution as a slower adaptive process over the interaction graph. Together, they form
a two-timescale replicator (i.e.,mutator system), where the fast process tracks the Evolutionarily
Stable Strategy (ESS) (Smith and Price, 1973; Taylor and Jonker, 1978) under the current topology
and the slow process updates against this equilibrium response (Borkar, 1997; Kushner and Yin,
2003; Nowak and Sigmund, 2004). Intuitively, ESS means that the team has reached a locally stable
division of labor, where each agent’s capability and interaction pattern are well matched to the task
and resistant to small deviations.
Motivated by this principle, we propose TacoMAS, which adapts bothTopology and capability
in aco-evolution framework forMASduring the inference of each query (Fig. 1). It consists of (1)
a fast capability loop, where agents optimize their expertise based on their execution outcomes
and contribution to the task in each round1; and (2) a slow meta-LLM-driven topology loop, which
periodically reviews the trajectory and proposes a birth-death (BD) update with a small set of edge
and agent edits. During the BD process, the meta-LLM decides which edges in the agent topology
should be modified and whether to introduce a new agent or remove an ineffective one. In this way,
the inference process is guided toward an ESS, as theoretically justified in § 4.
Following the standard setup of recent multi-agent studies (Kim et al., 2025), we evaluate
TacoMAS on four benchmarks spanning diverse task regimes: financial problem analysis, web
browsing, Minecraft-style planning, and workplace task execution. Compared with nearly 20 MAS
baselines, TacoMAS achieves an average improvement of 13.3% over the strongest baseline across
the four datasets.
In summary, our key contributions are three-fold:
1. We highlight a key principle for test-time multi-agent evolution: agent capabilities and team
topology should be adapted jointly, but on different time scales.
2. We propose TacoMAS, a test-time co-evolution framework that jointly adapts node capabilities
and graph topology through two coupled loops. We further provide a theoretical analysis
connecting this fast-slow design, showing convergence under bounded edit rates (§4).
1In practice, this capability refinement can be implemented via updating contextual memory, refining role-specific
instructions, or fine-tuning model parameters. Here we just use the contextual memory as an example.
2

TacoMAS: Test-Time Co-Evolution of Topology and Capability in LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems
3. We conduct extensive experiments on four benchmarks. TacoMAS achieves the best performance
on all datasets with an average improvement of 13.3% over the strongest baselines.
2. Related Work
Multi-agent LLM systems.The shift from single LLM agents (Schick et al., 2023; Shinn et al.,
2023; Yao et al., 2022) to multi-agent systems was motivated by tasks that demand specialized roles
and inter-agent coordination, e.g., long-horizon software development, retrieval-heavy financial
analysis, and multi-step planning (Jimenez et al., 2023; Wei et al., 2025; Zhou et al., 2023). The first
generation of multi-agent frameworks coordinates a hand-crafted team of role-specialized agents:
AutoGen (Wu et al., 2024) and MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2023) ship role templates and standardized
operating procedures; CAMEL (Li et al., 2023) pairs a user agent with an assistant in a fixed dialogue
loop; AgentVerse (Chen et al., 2023) and ChatDev (Qian et al., 2024) assembles role rosters per task
category.Limitation:the graph and roster are designed once and held fixed; mid-instance signals
cannot trigger new roles or rewiring.
Training- / Offline-evolving multi-agent systems.A second line replaces the human designer
with automated search or learning, but the resulting artifact is still frozen at inference. Two
families dominate. (i) Offline workflow/agent search produces one graph that all test queries share:
AFlow (Zhang et al., 2024) explores workflow graphs with MCTS, AgentSquare (Shang et al., 2024)
searches a modular “planning/reasoning/memory/tool-use” design space, ADAS (Hu et al., 2024)
alternates a code-space designer with an executor, and EvoAgentX (Dang et al., 2025) mutates agent
populations with evolutionary search. (ii) Trained per-query graph generators train a conditional
generator once, then sample (and freeze) a fresh graph for each query: ARG-Designer (Li et al., 2026)
autoregressively emits a DAG; MaAS (Zhang et al., 2025a) samples from a learned agentic supernet;
MetaAgent (Zhang et al., 2025c) predicts an FSM of agent transitions; SwarmAgentic (Zhang
et al., 2025b) assembles teams via a particle-swarm metaphor; MetaGen (Wang et al., 2026) and
EvolveRouter (Huang et al., 2026) likewise regenerate the roster / routing per query with only
constrained execution-time edits.Limitation:both families pay the design costonceand then freeze
the artifact at inference; whichever graph looked best at design/sampling time cannot react to
evidence that surfaces only after a few rounds of solving the actual instance.
Test-time evolving multi-agent systems.A growing line updates the MAS during an instance,
treating “inference time” as a dynamic process. Existing methods, however, each commit to a single
update axis. (i) Topology-only: ChatDev-Puppeteer (Dang et al., 2025) has a centralized orchestrator
pick the next persona over a fixed pool; SelfOrg (Tastan et al., 2026) rebuilds a top-k communication
DAG every round from response-similarity Shapley scores. In both, agent prompts and tool policies
are fixed. (ii) Capability-only: CORAL (Qu et al., 2026) updates a shared memory and skill bank
in a long-running loop, while the topology stays implicit. Crucially, either research line fails to
exploit the complete potential of multi-agent collaboration. TacoMAS fills this gap as the first to
explore the joint optimization of topology and capability within a single inference. We empirically
and theoretically demonstrate that their co-evolutionary interaction is essential for maximizing
performance. To formalize this, we leverage evolutionary game theory (Akin, 2013; Hofbauer and
Sigmund, 1998; Nowak and Sigmund, 2004; Taylor and Jonker, 1978) and two-time-scale stochastic
approximation (Borkar, 1997; Kushner and Yin, 2003) as our analytical machinery in §4.
3

TacoMAS: Test-Time Co-Evolution of Topology and Capability in LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems
t=1 t=2 Round K… Round 2K t=R……t=K+1
Fast Capability Update (Every Round)
t=K+2
Slow Topology Update (Every K Round)
Round t+1: Updated Agent Capability
A1
A2 A3
Query
Agent State
(per agent)
Role
Memory
Task Prompt
Tools
Answer
Full
Trajectory
Per-agent
Trajectory
Round t: Multi-Agent Execution
Meta-LLM
Generates
Refinement
Signals
Meta-Judge
Evaluate Each
Agent Contribution
Scores
Refinement
Prompts
Evolution Signals
A1
A2 A3
Query
Agent State
(per agent)
Role
Memory
Task Prompt
Tools
Refinement
Prompts
Refinement
Prompts
Contribution
Scores
Contribution
Scores Write Into
Next-round
States
A1
A2 A3
Query
Initial Graph
t=0
Round 0:(K-1)
Birth-Death
Operation
Edge
Editing
Round K:(2K-1)
Answer
Full
Trajectory
Per-agent
Trajectory
Meta-LLM
Generates
Topology
Update Strategy
Meta-Judge
Evaluate Each
Agent Contribution
Scores
Refinement
Prompts
Editing Signals
Refinement
Prompts
Birth-Death &
Edge Editing JSON
Contribution
Scores
Contribution
Scores
A1
A2
Query
A1
A2 A3
Query
A4
Final Graph
A1
A2 A5
A4
Query
Existing Agent
Deleted Agent
Newly Added Agent
Initial Agent
Figure 1|The overview framework of TacoMAS.
3. Method: TacoMAS
The overview of our proposed framework is illustrated in Figure 1 and the complete procedure of
TacoMAS is summarized in Algorithm 1.
3.1. Setup and Notation
Multi-agent system setting.Given a query q, MAS generate an answer a through a complete
forward workflow,i.e.,a round of MAS execution. This workflow is defined by the system’s config-
uration, including its agent roles, individual capabilities, and communication topology. Different
MAS frameworks adopt varied designs for these components to optimize task performance.
Test-time evolution.Unlike static systems, we perform an online evolution of the MAS during
the inference of each query. We formalize the system as a directed agent graph Gt = (T t, Φt)
indexed by execution round t= 0, 1,. . ., R. This representation explicitly decouples the system
into two parts:topology Tt = (V t,Et), whereVt is the set of agents (vertices) andEt⊆V t×V t is
the set of directed edges (information channels). In addition, we havecapability Φt ={ϕ v,t}v∈Vt,
denoting the collection of capability states, where each ϕv,t encompasses an agent’s specific prompt,
contextual memory, and tool inventory. In our framework, aMeta-LLM M initializesG0 and
orchestrates its subsequent evolution. The agents v∈V t in the graph instantiate specific roles from
a fixed poolR(e.g.,Planner, Searcher, Verifier).
4

TacoMAS: Test-Time Co-Evolution of Topology and Capability in LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems
3.2. Two-time-scale Dynamics
The central design of TacoMAS is the asynchronous co-evolution of agent capabilities Φ and
topologyTon two distinct time scales. This joint update process is formulated as:
Φt+1 =F C(Φt;T t,ξ t),T t+K =F T(Tt;Φ t:t+K ,ξ t:t+K ), (1)
where FC and FT denote the capability and topology operators, respectively, and K≥ 1 is the
slow-update interval. Specifically, the fast capability update FC occurs in every execution round. It
allows agents to immediately incorporate feedback from the trajectory ξt to adapt their reasoning
patterns and tool-use strategies within the current topology. In contrast, the slow topology update
FT modifies the communication topology only after K rounds. This slower rhythm ensures that the
topology remains stable for a sufficient duration, allowing agents to reach their performance ceiling
under the given topology before the system considers a structural overhaul.
This two-time-scale design is essential to maintain the stability of the co-evolution process. If
the topology T changes as rapidly as individual capabilities Φ, the refined strategies of agents may
become obsolete due to sudden shifts in their information sources or collaborators. Such rapid
structural changes can lead to systemic divergence. By decoupling these two processes, the fast
dynamics effectively track a quasi-stationary equilibrium under a fixed architecture. The slow loop
then optimizes the underlying graph topology based on the aggregated performance observed
across multiple rounds. Consequently, the interval K serves as a critical parameter to balance local
strategy adaptation with global structural exploration.
3.3. Fast Capability LoopF C
Within each execution round t, the fast capability loop optimizes the expertise of individual agents
under a fixed topology Tt. Every agent v∈V t executes its assigned role based on its current
capability state ϕv,t, which is instantiated through a combination of role-specific instructions and
contextual memory. This process generates aper-agent trajectory rv,t, including reasoning steps,
tool-use outcomes, and outgoing messages. The per-agent trajectory collectively forms the round’s
full execution trajectoryξ t ={r v,t}v∈Vt.
Capability update via memory refinement.In practice, the capability updateF C is realized by a
meta-judge and a meta-LLM acting as a diagnostic coach. After each round, the system generates
evolution signals that are written back to the agent’s state to update ϕv,t, which includes two parts:
1)Evaluation signals: To ensure objective assessment, the meta-judge evaluates each agent’s behavior
based on the full trajectory ξt to provide a numerical contribution scorecv,t and a textual justification
for the rating. 2)Refinement signals: To improve each agent’s capability, the meta-LLM diagnoses the
agent’s specificper-agent trajectory rv,t and the meta-judge’s feedback (cv,t, justification). It generates
feedback identifying specific errors in rv,t and a concrete execution plan for the subsequent round.
During the next round’s initialization, these results are incorporated into the agent’s contextual
prompt, effectively refining its capability state ϕ via memory refinement (detailed prompts for
meta-judge and meta-LLM can be found in App. D).
Theoretical abstraction of capability evolution.To analyze this process, we model the agents’
capability evolution as a discrete replicator-style update Hofbauer and Sigmund (1998) over the
capability states. Intuitively, this mechanism acts as a “selection pressure” that reallocates computa-
5

TacoMAS: Test-Time Co-Evolution of Topology and Capability in LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems
tional influence toward higher-performing behaviors Hofbauer and Sigmund (1998).
ϕv,t+1 ∝ϕ v,t exp

η

cv,t− ¯ct

, ¯ct = 1
|Vt| ∑
u∈Vt
cu,t (2)
where ¯ct is the mean contribution and η> 0 controls the update strength Hofbauer and Sigmund
(1998). This formulation captures the population-level effect of the agent’s capability state updates:
while the meta-LLM provides textual refinement for all agents, the reinforcement is biased such that
high-contributing patterns are amplified and prioritized, while erroneous or marginal behaviors are
effectively suppressed within the team’s collective reasoning Hofbauer and Sigmund (1998).
Connecting theoretical abstraction to meta-LLM actions.To ensure that these implementation-
level actions are consistent with the replicator flow (Eq. (2)), we introduce the following assumption
to justify that the meta-LLM effectively drives the system towards higher performance.
Assumption 1(Replicator-bias of the meta-LLM update).There exists η> 0 and slack ϵnoise≥ 0
such that, for every fast roundt:
E
¯ct+1|H t

≥ ¯ct +ηVar v

cv,t

−η ϵ noise (3)
where ¯ct is the team mean contribution, andHt ={ξ τ, cτ}τ≤t denotes the filtration of trajectories
and scores up to roundt.
This assumption implies that the meta-LLM’s refinement acts as aShahshahani gradient ascent
on the mean fitness, ensuring that the heuristic memory updates are statistically aligned with the
formal replicator dynamics. Specifically, it guarantees that the textual modifications systematically
improve the MAS performance (empirical justification is provided in App. C.3).
3.4. Slow Topology LoopF T
While the fast capability loop optimizes per-agent capability, the slow update FT reconfigures the
MAS topology by modifying the sets of agentsV and edgesE. After every K rounds, the meta-LLM
M proposes a structural delta ∆T= (∆V , ∆E) to resolve systemic bottlenecks that individual
capability refinement cannot fix.
Per-agent birth-death and edge edits.The structural delta ∆T is realized through two operations:
1) Birth-Death: Abirthintroduces a new agent role to expand functional capacity, while adeath
removes agents whose contribution scores cv remain consistently low. This process mimics discrete
mutation by altering the system’s “population support” to escape local optima. 2) Edge Reconfigu-
ration:M adds or removes communication channels to repair information flow. For instance, if
a verifier lacks sufficient context,M may create a new edge from a high-contribution searcher to
bridge the evidence gap. The two operations are implemented via textual prompt (see App. D).
Update stability.To maintain the stability of the two-time-scale dynamics, we introduce edit
budgets on the structural update:
Tt+K =T t⊕∆T,|∆V|≤B V,|∆E|≤B E, (4)
where BV and BE represent the maximum allowed edits for agents and edges, respectively. This
constraint prevents abrupt topological shifts from destabilizing the refined capability states ϕ. By
limiting structural volatility, we ensure that the progress gained through fast-loop evolution is
preserved during reconfiguration.
6

TacoMAS: Test-Time Co-Evolution of Topology and Capability in LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems
Algorithm 1TacoMAS Procedure
Require:queryq; round capR; slow intervalK; edit budgetB= (B V,BE ); thresholdτ.
1:G 0←M init(q);t←0.
2:repeat
3:forv∈V t do▷fast capability loopF C
4:execute tool policy ofvunder(ϕ v,t,E t), observer v,t
5:c v,t←J(r v,t);ϕ v,t+1←F C(ϕv,t;r v,t,c v,t)(2)
6:end for
7:read answera t, scores t←J(a t,q)
8:if(t+1)modK=0ands t <τthen▷slow topology loopF T
9:∆T,{∆ϕ v}←M slow(Tt,Φ t−K:t ,{c v,τ})
10:enforce|∆V|≤B V,|∆E|≤B E ;T t+1←T t⊕∆T(4)
11:end if
12:t←t+1
13:untils t≥τort≥RorS TO P
14:returna t from the sink agent ofG t.
Initialization and termination.The meta-LLM M seeds the initial graphG0 by selecting roles
from the poolR; we set|V0|= 5. The evolution process terminates when one of the following
conditions is met: 1) the global score st reaches the task-specific success threshold τ; 2) the execution
reaches the maximum round budget R; or 3) the meta-LLM issues astopsignal upon detecting
convergence in the agent trajectories.
4. Theoretical Analysis
We provide a lightweight analysis of TacoMAS as a two-time-scale replicator–mutator process. Full
proofs are provided in App. A.
4.1. Fast Loop as Replicator Dynamics
The fast capability update in Eq. (2) has the standard form of a discrete replicator update: behaviors
with above-average contribution are amplified, while below-average behaviors are suppressed.
Under a fixed topologyT t, this update approximates the continuous replicator flow
˙ϕv =ϕ v

fv− ¯f

, (5)
where fv denotes the expected contribution of agent v and ¯f is the team-average contribution. This
flow is a Shahshahani-gradient ascent on mean fitness (Akin, 2013; Hofbauer and Sigmund, 1998).
Assumption 2(Bounded contribution noise).The meta-judge contribution score cv,t is a bounded
noisy estimate of the expected contributionf v, with noise bounded byϵ.
Proposition 1(Fast-loop improvement).Under Assumption 2, one fast update satisfies
E
¯ft+1|H t

≥ ¯ft−ηϵ. (6)
Moreover, when contribution variance is nonzero, the expected update is biased toward increasing the
team-average contribution.
Proposition 1 formalizes the role of the capability loop: it improves agents’ local reasoning
strategies under the current communication structure. However, it cannot add new agents, remove
ineffective ones, or repair missing communication channels. Thus, the fast loop may converge to a
topology-dependent plateau.
7

TacoMAS: Test-Time Co-Evolution of Topology and Capability in LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems
4.2. Slow Loop as Bounded Mutation
The slow topology update addresses this limitation. Every K rounds, the meta-LLM applies a
bounded structural edit ∆T= (∆V , ∆E) , as defined in Eq. (4). Birth–death operations change
the agent support, while edge edits change the communication topology. These operations act as
mutation steps over the current multi-agent organization.
Assumption 3(Bounded and biased topology edits).Each slow update obeys the edit budgets
in Eq. (4). In addition, conditioned on the recent trajectory, the proposed edit improves the best
achievable team contribution under the topology with probabilityp>1/2.
This assumption captures the intended behavior of the meta-LLM: it is not required to always
find a better topology, but its edits are more likely to move the system toward a better communica-
tion topology than away from it.
4.3. Joint Two-Time-Scale Convergence
Combining the two loops yields a replicator-mutator process. The fast replicator phase moves the
agents toward a local performance plateau under the current topology, and the slow mutation phase
changes the topology when this plateau is insufficient. Let L(Φ, T) denote the distance to the set of
locally stable high-performing configurations, as defined in App. A.
Theorem 2(Two-time-scale convergence).Under Assumptions 2–3, there exists γ> 0such that the
joint update satisfies
E[L(Φt+1,T t+1)|H t]≤(1−γ)L(Φ t,T t) + ˜ϵ, (7)
where ˜ϵcollects contribution-score noise, meta-LLM errors, and discretization slack.
Theorem 2 shows that the expected distance to the stable configuration set contracts up to a
noise-controlled neighborhood. In particular, the fast loop alone can only optimize capabilities
within a fixed topology, while the slow loop provides the mutation needed to escape topology-
induced plateaus. This explains why jointly evolving capabilities and topology is more effective
than updating either side alone.
5. Experimental Results
5.1. Experimental Setup
Benchmarks.According to Kim et al. (2025), we evaluate on four benchmarks covering distinct
reasoning regimes: finance (Bigeard et al., 2025) for retrieval-heavy financial analysis over SEC
filings; browsecomp-plus (Chen et al., 2025) for entity disambiguation and multi-hop retrieval over a
curated corpus; plancraft (Dagan et al., 2024) for Minecraft-style crafting and feasibility planning;
and workbench (Styles et al., 2024) for realistic workplace workflows with tool use. Together, they
test retrieval, planning, numerical reasoning, and cross-tool coordination.
Baselines.We compare TacoMAS with 20 multi-agent baselines, grouped by when adaptation
occurs.Fixed-topologymethods use manually specified communication patterns and never evolve.
Offline-evolvedmethods search or optimize workflows once before deployment and freeze them at
inference.Per-instancemethods generate a graph for each query but keep it fixed while solving.
Within-instancemethods adapt during inference, but only along one axis: topology (ChatDev-
Puppeteer, SelfOrg) or capability (CORAL). All baselines use the same LLM backend and dataset-
specific tools unless otherwise stated. Detailed baseline descriptions are in App. C.1.
8

TacoMAS: Test-Time Co-Evolution of Topology and Capability in LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems
Table 1| Main accuracy results. Baselines are grouped by their evolution time scale. Best accuracy
in each dataset is in bold. The best baseline in each dataset is underlined, and the last row reports
the absolute accuracy improvement of TacoMAS over the best baseline.
Method finance browsecomp plancraft workbench
Offline-evolved
MetaGPT (Hong et al., 2023) 0.348 0.550 0.668 0.473
AFlow (Zhang et al., 2024) 0.343 0.633 0.717 0.478
AgentSquare (Shang et al., 2024) 0.286 0.625 0.574 0.440
EvoAgentX (Wang et al., 2025) 0.313 0.591 0.763 0.419
ADAS (Hu et al., 2024) 0.294 0.595 0.497 0.645
Per-instance graph design
AgentVerse (Chen et al., 2023) 0.301 0.625 0.653 0.523
ARG-Designer (Li et al., 2026) 0.295 0.621 0.619 0.595
MaAS (Zhang et al., 2025a) 0.284 0.620 0.492 0.538
MetaAgent (Zhang et al., 2025c) 0.349 0.601 0.560 0.469
SwarmAgentic (Zhang et al., 2025b) 0.338 0.570 0.812 0.651
MetaGen (Wang et al., 2026) 0.419 0.513 0.479 0.492
EvolveRouter (Huang et al., 2026) 0.332 0.170 0.320 0.290
Fixed-topology(Kim et al., 2025)
SAS 0.539 0.200 0.530 0.347
MAS-Independent 0.529 0.090 0.710 0.416
MAS-Decentralized 0.445 0.240 0.600 0.446
MAS-Centralized 0.500 0.270 0.560 0.386
MAS-Hybrid 0.537 0.260 0.540 0.386
Within-instance evolution
ChatDev-Puppeteer (Qian et al., 2024) 0.340 0.603 0.553 0.441
SelfOrg (Tastan et al., 2026) 0.377 0.688 0.712 0.441
CORAL (Qu et al., 2026) 0.409 0.505 0.458 0.511
Topology-capability co-evolution
TacoMAS 0.767 0.745 0.887 0.824
Improvement+22.8 +5.7 +7.5 +17.3
Metrics.We report accuracy ( Acc), which is the mean rubric-judged accuracy over instances (Kim
et al., 2025). Each instance may contain one or more evaluation criteria, including correctness and
contradiction rubrics, and the instance score is the fraction of rubric items passed.
Detailed settings.All agents use Gemini-2.5-flash-lite as the base LLM, while GPT-4o-mini is
used as the rubric judge. For TacoMAS, the meta-LLM defaults to Gemini-2.5-pro. Unless otherwise
stated, TacoMAS runs for at most R= 10 fast rounds with slow topology updates every K= 2
rounds, agent cap|V| max = 20, at most two birth/death pairs, and at most four edge edits per
slow update. The initial graph is the same 5-role centralized template used by the fixed-topology
baseline, consisting of planner, searcher, calculator, verifier, and reflector agents, so improvements
are attributable to evolution.
5.2. Main Results
Table 1 compares TacoMAS with 20 multi-agent baselines on four benchmarks. TacoMAS achieves
the best accuracy across all datasets, outperforming offline-evolved workflows, per-instance graph
design methods, and fixed-topology MAS baselines. These results suggest that pre-optimized work-
flows, topology-only adaptation, and manually fixed collaboration patterns are often insufficient for
diverse test-time tasks. Compared with within-instance evolution methods, TacoMAS also achieves
stronger performance, showing that jointly evolving agent capabilities and communication topology
is especially useful for tasks whose optimal topology and agent skills change across different stages
9

TacoMAS: Test-Time Co-Evolution of Topology and Capability in LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems
plan
search
verify
calc
reflect
(a) initial graph
plan search
verify
calc reflect
research
(b) after slow update 1
plan search
verify
reflect research
research
(c) after slow update 3
newborn agent / edge added removed agent / edge existing
Figure 2| Representative evolution trace on a finance instance. The initial graph evolves into a
task-specific search-research-verify pipeline. For example, a “link research” is deleted while a “data
research” is newly added after 3 rounds of slow update.
!+,+%(/

+& +)

+,*-,
!+, *
+,*-,
!$0

(*

!$'%-*1 "$'(. *$'$,
+1
&$'
#*

&$'

-*1

-*1 & $'+%(/-)

$'$,$%" ',(-',

-*1
!$'' *(/+ (&))%-+

%%+

-*1
.( %!*"

$'+%(/-)

Taco-MAS
!+,+%(/

+& +)

+,*-,
!+, *
+,*-,
!$0

(*

!$'%-*1 "$'(. *$'$,
+1
&$'
#*

&$'

-*1

-*1 & $'+%(/-)

$'$,$%" ',(-',

-*1
!$'' *(/+ (&))%-+

%%+

-*1
.( %!*"

$'+%(/-)

Taco-MAS
Figure 3| (a)Accuracy and gain under different fast/slow update schedules on finance benchmark.
(b)Accuracy and median slow-update count by expert-time tier onfinance benchmark.(c)Accuracy
under different initial agent counts.(d)Accuracyw.r.t.LLM calls under different models.
of inference.
5.3. Analysis of TacoMAS
Evolution trajectory.Figure 2 shows that TacoMAS changes the team organization during infer-
ence rather than only increasing compute. The graph removes unhelpful roles, introduces missing
capabilities, and strengthens useful communication paths. This indicates that the meta-LLM learns
an instance-specific division of labor instead of applying a fixed template (more cases in App. C.2).
Fast/slow update schedule.Figure 3(a) shows that the fast/slow separation is important. Updat-
ing topology too frequently makes the trajectory unstable, while freezing topology prevents full
specialization. The default schedule works best because capabilities adapt quickly to local failures,
while topology changes more slowly to preserve coordination.
10

TacoMAS: Test-Time Co-Evolution of Topology and Capability in LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems
Gemini 2.5
Flash-Lite
Claude Haiku-3.5 GPT-4o mini
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.42 0.43 0.44
0.77 0.73 0.72
Accuracy
init. evolved
Gemini 2.5
Pro
Gemini 2.5
Flash
Gemini 2.5
Flash-Lite
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0.42 0.39 0.45
0.77 0.72 0.72
Accuracy
init. evolved
Figure 4| Pre- vs post-evolution accuracy under (1) left: different agent LLM backbones and (2)
right: different meta-LLM backbones.
Difficulty-adaptive evolution.On the finance benchmark, we group instances by the provided
expert-time annotation and report the number of slow updates in Figure 3(b). TacoMAS spends
more slow updates on higher-expert-time instances, although this annotation is never observed by
the model. This supports that its extra computation is adaptively allocated from trajectory feedback
to achieve better performance in complex tasks, rather than uniformly increasing reasoning depth.
Computational cost analysis.We measure computational cost using Calls, defined as the mean
number of LLM calls per instance, and compare TacoMAS with SelfOrg, the strongest within-
instance evolution baseline, as shown in Figure 3(d). The results show that increasing inference cost
alone does not guarantee better performance: SelfOrg requires many LLM calls but quickly reaches
a performance plateau. In contrast, TacoMAS continues to improve as more evolution rounds are
added, indicating that its additional inference budget is effectively converted into accuracy gains.
This suggests that TacoMAS has the potential to exhibit inference-time scaling behavior, where
performance can improve with increased test-time computation.
5.4. Robustness Analysis
Initial agent count.Figures 3(c) show that performance is non-monotonic in the initial team size.
Too few agents limit role diversity, while too many agents increase coordination complexity and
dilute the effect of each bounded topology edit. Meanwhile, inference cost grows with team size.
This suggests that a moderate initial team offers the best balance between role diversity, coordination
stability, and compute.
Backbone robustness.Figure 4 shows that evolution improves performance across both agent
backbones and meta-LLM backbones. Although different models produce different initial graphs
and outputs, the post-evolution gains remain consistent. This suggests that the main benefit comes
from the co-evolution process rather than a specific LLM backbone.
6. Conclusion
We present TacoMAS, a test-time co-evolution framework for LLM-based multi-agent systems,
which formulates inference as a two-time-scale online adaptation process that jointly refines agent
capabilities rapidly and communication topology slowly within each task instance. Theoretically,
we connect the framework to a replicator-mutator process and show that the joint dynamics can
contract toward a task-conditioned stable region. Empirically, TacoMAS achieves the best accuracy
on all four benchmarks. Further analyses show that the fast/slow update schedule is crucial, and
the amount of evolution is adaptively adjusted according to task difficulty. Overall, our results
11

TacoMAS: Test-Time Co-Evolution of Topology and Capability in LLM-based Multi-Agent Systems
suggest that inference-time computation in multi-agent LLM systems should not be conceived as a
static forward pass, but a temporal process of co-evolution. Limitations are in the App. B.
