record_id: arxiv:2507.03726
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2507.03726
fetched_title: AGENT-BASED DETECTION AND RESOLUTION OF INCOMPLETENESS AND AMBIGUITY IN INTERACTIONS WITH LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T18:59:59Z

arXiv:2507.03726v1 [cs.AI] 4 Jul 2025
AGENT-BASED DETECTION AND RESOLUTION OF
INCOMPLETENESS AND AMBIGUITY IN INTERACTIONS WITH
LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS
Riya Naik
BITS Pilani, K K Birla Goa Campus
p20210056@goa.bits-pilani.ac.in
Ashwin Srinivasan
BITS Pilani, K K Birla Goa Campus
ashwin@goa.bits-pilani.ac.in
Swati Agarwal
PandaByte Innovations Pvt Ltd
agrswati@ieee.org
Estrid He
RMIT University
estrid.he@rmit.edu.au
ABSTRACT
Many of us now treat Large Language Models (LLMs) as modern-day oracles, asking it almost
any kind of question. However, consulting an LLM does not have to be a single-turn activity. But
long multi-turn interactions can get tedious, if it is simply to clarify contextual information that
can be arrived at through reasoning. In this paper, we examine the use of agent-based architecture
to bolster LLM-based Question-Answering (QA) systems with additional reasoning capabilities.
We examine the automatic resolution of potential incompleteness or ambiguities in questions by
transducers implemented using LLM-based agents. We focus on several benchmark datasets that are
known to contain questions with these deficiencies to varying degrees. We equip two different LLMs
(GPT-3.5-Turbo and Llama-4-Scout) with agents that act as specialists in detecting and resolving–at
least partially–deficiencies of incompleteness and ambiguity. The agents are implemented as zero-shot
ReAct agents. Rather than producing an answer in a single step, the language model now decides
between 3 actions: (a) classify; (b) resolve; and (c) answer. Action (a) decides if the question is
incomplete, ambiguous, or normal; and action (b) determines if any deficiencies identified can be
resolved. Action (c) answers the resolved form of the question. We compare the use of LLMs with
and without the use of agents with these components. Our results show these benefits of agents with
transducer: (1) A shortening of the length of interactions with human; (2) An improvement in the
answer quality; and (3) Explainable resolution of deficiencies in the question. On the negative side,
we find while the approach may result in additional LLM invocations and, in some cases, increased
latency. But on tested datasets, the benefits outweigh the costs except when questions already have
sufficient context. Suggesting the agent-based approach could be a useful mechanism to harness the
power of LLMs to develop more robust QA systems.
1 Introduction
Conversational AI systems have long been anticipated, both in fiction and real life. While the focus in fiction has
inevitably been on the modality of delivery (voice), the content has not been quite as demanding (“Tea. Earl Grey.
Hot.”), perhaps reflecting the state-of-the-art of natural language processing at the time of conception. However, this
latter aspect has recently been undergoing rapid re-evaluation with the advent of Large Language Models (LLMs).
LLM-based technology is increasingly part of the design of systems involving some form of human interaction. These
systems control how we access information, interact with support services, and use devices [ 64]. It is therefore not
unexpected that a significant amount of academic and industrial research and development is invested in a better
understanding of interactions with LLMs.

NAIK , S RINIVASAN , AGARWAL AND HE
Early applications of LLMs were confined to prompt-response interactions, functioning as static text generators without
capabilities for planning or external interactions. Techniques such as chains, ReAct, and few-shot prompting introduced
limited step-by-step processing, enabling LLMs to perform sequential reasoning [63]. However, these methods often
lack the flexibility required to handle complex, dynamic tasks [34]. The recent emergence of goal-based autonomous
agents has enhanced the utility of LLMs. These frameworks integrate LLMs within systems capable of multi-step
reasoning, context maintenance across various functions, and interfacing with external environments like APIs and data
sources [17]. Consequently, LLMs can now be part of software that can plan, observe, decide, and act, which makes
them a dynamic component in the design of intelligent systems [60].
This paper is concerned with the design of intelligent question-answering (QA) systems. It is now evident that modern
LLMs can store very large amounts of context-information accumulated during the course of an interaction (input
token-lengths are now millions of tokens, and only expected to increase [1]). Techniques such as in-context learning
that provide feedback in the form of clarificatory instances and domain knowledge can greatly assist an LLM in
retrieving relevant answers to queries [16, 8]. The amount of such clarificatory information can often be surprisingly
small [41]. LLMs have the mechanisms necessary for conducting interactive conversations [14]. But, a question of
some conceptual importance is this: when do LLMs need interactive feedback, and how should this be provided?
There are 3 ways to approach such a question. First, from a mathematical point-of-view, by assessing if there is an
information-theoretic gap in what is known and what is asked. The LLM may then need clarification to reduce this
uncertainty (used in a mathematical sense). Secondly, is a technological approach. In this, we could attempt to see if
current LLM technology (software or hardware) make it impossible for the LLM to distinguish between some aspects of
the problem (for example, positional encoding makes it impossible to see the question is about sets and not sequences).
Finally, a behavioral approach, in which we try to assess the conditions for feedback by examining the question, and
possibly the context that preceded it. It is this third category that is of interest to us in this paper. We focus on whether
augmenting an LLM with agents capable of identifying and resolving problems with the question can improve the QA
performance of an LLM. Specifically, we focus on agents for identifying 2 kinds of problems with a question: whether
it is incomplete; and whether it is ambiguous. We motivate the use of agents through a simple conceptual model of QA
as a form of communication between agents. In this model, incompleteness and ambiguity are defined in an ideal sense
using the response of an oracle. Practically, such an oracle is usually unavailable, and the agents are intended to act as
proxies with limited background information (when compared to the oracle).
2 A Simple Messaging System for Interaction
In this section, we describe a simple message-based communication mechanism between a pair of agents. It consists of
messages from a sending agent to a receiving agent.
Definition 1 (Messages). A message is a 3-tuple of the form (a,m,b ) wherea is the identifier of the sender;b is the
identifier of the receiver; andm is a finite length message-string.
We define the following categories of message-strings:
Termination. The message-stringm =′′ □′′ denotes that sender is terminating the communication with receiver.
Question. The message-stringm =′′?n(s)′′ denotes that the sender is sending a questions with identifiern to receiver.
Answer. The message-stringm =′′!n(s)′′ denotes that the sender is sending an answers with identifiern to receiver.
Statement. The message-stringm =′′⊤(s)′′ denotes that sender is sending a statement to receiver.
In the rest of the paper, we omit the identifier n as long as the context is clear. In the above definitions, s represents
a sequence of message strings. However, in this paper, in ?(s)|s| = 1 (that is, only 1 question is allowed at a time).
There can be multiple answers or even no answers for a question. That is, in !(s),|s|≥ 0. Additionally, in⊤(s), we
will require|s|≥ 1. If ordering is unimportant, we will sometimes show s as a set instead of a sequence. In all cases, if
|s| = 1, we will denote the message by the singleton element, dispensing with the sequence (or set) notation.
The interaction between a pair of agents consists of 1 or more turns.
Definition 2 (Interaction). A (1-step) turn from agenta to agentb is the pair of messages (M1,M 2), whereM1 =
(a,m 1,b ),M2 = (b,m 2,a ), andm1̸= □. A k-step turn is the sequence⟨T1,T 2,··· ,Tk⟩, whereTi (1≤i≤k) is a
1-step turn froma tob. Similarly for 1-step and k-step turns fromb toa. We will call a sequence of 1 or more turns
betweena andb an interaction betweena andb.
Example 1 (Interaction). Leth denote a human agent andm denote a machine. Below is an example of a possible
3-step turn interaction betweenh andm:
⟨ (h,⊤(Child x has a height is 4 ft.),m ),(m,⊤(ok),h ),
2

NAIK , S RINIVASAN , AGARWAL AND HE
(h,⊤(The height of child y is the square root of the height of child x),m ), (m,⊤((ok),h ),
(h, ?1(What is the height of y),m ), (m, !1(y is + 2 or − 2),h )⟩
Example 2 (Interaction (contd.)). A 4-step turn interaction betweenh andm is:
⟨(h,⊤(Child x has a heightis 4 ft.),m ), (m,⊤(ok),h ),
(h,⊤(The height of child y is the square root of the height of child x),m ),(m,⊤(ok),h ),
(h, ?1(What is the height of y),m ), (m, !1(y is + 2 or − 2),h ),
(h,⊤(Your answer is not completely correct since height has to be positive),m ), (m, !1(y is + 2),h )⟩
We note that each turn consists of a sequence of 2 messages. Thus, with every interaction consisting of k turns
⟨T1,··· ,Tk⟩, there exists a corresponding sequence ⟨M1,M 2,··· ,M 2k⟩ of messages and ⟨m1,m 2,··· ,m 2k⟩
message-strings. By construction, the sequence ⟨m1,m 3,...,m 2k−1⟩ will be from agent a to agent b, and
⟨m2,m 4,...,m 2k⟩ will be from agentb to agenta. We denote these as⟨mab⟩ and⟨mba⟩ for short.
Interaction sequences allow us to define the context for an agent. We assume any agent has access to a (possibly empty)
set of prior statements, which we call background knowledge.
Definition 3 (Interaction Context). Without loss of generality, let (T1,T 2,··· ,Tk) be a k-step interaction from
agenta to agent b. We denote the interaction context for a, or simply the context for a, on the the ith turn Ti as
Ca,i = (m1,m 2,...,m 2i−2), and the interaction context for b, , or simply the context for b, on the ith turnCb,i =
(m1,m 2,...,m 2i−1).
In this paper, we are interested in k-step interactions between agents a andb, in which the context Ca,k contains a
question ?α(q) and the contextCb,k terminates with a corresponding answer !α(a). We define a special agent ∆ called
the oracle. The oracle’s answers are taken to be always correct.
Remark 1 (Interaction with the Oracle). We note the following special features of the oracle:
• ∆ knows everything upto the present, including the content of conversations between any non-oracular agents;
• Only a 1-step interaction is allowed between a non-oracular agenta and ∆. The interaction consists of a turn
T where:
→ T = ((a, ?q, ∆), (∆, !(s),a )); or
→ T = ((a, ?q, ∆), (∆, □,a )).
• The answer(s) provided by ∆ are always correct.
Example 3 (Interaction with an Oracle). We consider the example again, this time with the human agent interacting
with an oracle ∆. A 1-step interaction betweenh and ∆ is:
⟨ ((h, ?1(What is the height of child y), ∆), (∆, !1((y = +2, □)),h ))⟩
The oracle allows us to categorise questions and answers.
Definition 4 (Incomplete Question). Without loss of generality, let(T1,T 2,··· ,Tk) be a k-step interaction froma to
b. LetCb,i denote the context forb on theith turn. LetTi = ((a, ?(q),b ),·), where agent a sends question q to b. Let
((b, ?(q), ∆), (∆, !(s),b )) be an interaction betweenb and ∆. If s = □, we conclude thatq is incomplete. In such a
case, we will also say it is incomplete forb givenCb,i.
That is, a question is incomplete, if the oracle does not give an answer. This is because if the oracle cannot answer,
neither canb. Similarly:
Definition 5 (Ambiguous Question). Without loss of generality, let(T1,T 2,··· ,Tk) be a k-step interaction froma to
b. LetCb,i denote the context forb on theith turn. LetTi = ((a, ?(q),b ),·), where agent a sends question q to b. Let
((b, ?(q), ∆), (∆, !(s),b )) be an interaction betweenb and ∆. If|s| > 1 then we will say q is ambiguous. In such a
case, we will also sayq is ambiguous forb givenCb,i.
That is, a question is ambiguous if the oracle returns more than one answer. We assume that questions are either
incomplete or ambiguous, but not both at once.
We are still left with the requirement of needing to consult the oracle to decide whether a question is one or the other.
This is impractical for several reasons: (1) Such an agent may not be available; (2) Even if available, it may be extremely
expensive to consult an oracle; and (3) Even if costs were manageable, the oracle is not an ideal agent for inclusion in
the design of conversational system. It only engages in single-turn conversations, does not provide any explanations for
answers, and makes no attempt to provide answers by resolving any incompleteness or ambiguity. To address these
issues, we introduce the notion of context transducers .
3

NAIK , S RINIVASAN , AGARWAL AND HE
Definition 6 (Context-Transducer). LetC denote the set consisting of sequences of message-strings. A context-
transducer agent is a function Λ :C→C .
Our interest in this paper is on transducers that operate on contexts that terminate in a question.
Definition 7 (Context-Transducer for Questions) . Let C denote the set consisting of sequences of message-
strings. A context-transducer for questions, or simply a question-transducer, is a function that maps any
(m1,m 2,...,m j, ?α(q))∈C to some (m′
1,m′
2,...,m ′
k, ?α(q′))∈C .
Note that as defined, a question transducer can not only reformulate the question, but it can also alter and augment
the context string it received.1 Our focus in this paper will be on context-preserving and context-augmenting
transducers for questions. In the former j =k andm′
i =mi in Def. 7 above. In the latter j <K andm′
i =mi for
i = 1...j . In both cases,q andq′ may differ.
Next we describe the implementation of a context-transducer for questions that uses an agent-based architecture to
identify incomplete or ambiguous questions, and provide a reformulated question and context.
3 Implementation of a Question-Transducer
Our implementation of a question-transducer will involve two functions: (1) Classify:C7→C×Y , whereY is a
set of labels{incomplete,ambiguous,normal}; and (2) Resolve:C×Y7→C . Given an initial contextc∈C , the
question-transducer computes Resolve(Classify(c)).2 The functions themselves are routine (Procedures 1 and 2).
Procedure 1 The Classify Function.
Input:c : a context; Λl: a question-classifier;B: domain-specific information
Output: (c′,y ), wherec′ is a context, andy′∈{incomplete,ambiguous,normal}
1: ifc = (m1,m 2,...,m k, ?α(q)) then
2: (y,e ) := Λl(c,B ) ▷e is an explanation
3: else
4: y :=normal
5: end if
6: return (c,y )
Procedure 2 The Resolve Function
Input:lc: a labeled context; Λr: a question-resolver;B: domain-specific information
Output:c′: a context
1: Let lc = (m1,m 2,...,m k, ?α(q),y )
2: ify = incomplete∨ y = ambiguous then
3: (?α(q′),e )← Λr(c,B ) ▷e is an explanation
4: c′← (m1,m 2,...,m k,e, !α(q′))
5: else
6: c′←c
7: end if
8: returnc′
In this paper, Λc and Λr are implemented using LLM-based agents. Procedure 3 shows a a simplified form of a
goal-based agent (in the sense used [4]). Λc and Λr use instances of this generic agent to achieve the goals of question-
classification and question-resolution (the generic agent includes some additional parameters, which will need to be
provided by the Classify and Resolve functions).
The functionality of Procedure 3 is in fact readily available in recent implementations of LLM-based agentic software
systems. We show by way of example how Λc, the question-classifier can be implemented using a widely used
LLM-agent software environment.
Example 4 (Implementing Λc). The question-classifier can be implemented using LangChain [66] as follows.
Langchain requires as input the following: (a) An LLM model (correctly, an API to the model); (b) A “profile”, which
is essentially a structured prompt that contains the following: (i) The question; (ii) The context preceding the question;
1Clearly, a similar definition can be provided for answer-transducers. We will not require it in this paper.
2If c does not terminate in a question, then Classify(·) simply returns (normal,c ). If Resolve(·) receives an input of
(normal,c ), it simply returnsc
4

NAIK , S RINIVASAN , AGARWAL AND HE
Procedure 3 A Goal-Based LLM Agent
Input:λ: an LLM model;c: a context;B: prior information;g: a goal
Output: (r,e ):r is a response ande is an explanation of howr was obtained
1: C :=c
2: Done :=False
3: (r,e ) := (∅,∅)
4: while¬Done do
5: P :=AssemblePrompt (C,B )
6: (r,e ) :=Call_LLM(λ,P )
7: ifGoalAchieved(g,r )∨ (r =∅) then
8: Done :=True
9: else
10: C :=Update(C, (r,e ))
11: end if
12: end while
13: return (r,e )
(iii) The goal of classifying the question as incomplete,ambiguous, ornormal; (iv) The kind of agent-behaviour
required (for example, a “0-shot ReAct agent. ”
Given these inputs, LangChain implements a (sophisticated) version of the iterative procedure in Procedure 3, and
returns as output a response and an associated explanation. The output depends on the agent-behaviour specified. For
example, when configured as a 0-shot ReAct agent, the LLM specified by (a) is invoked with the structured prompt,
LLM analyses the question in relation to the context and classification goal. The LLM first performs some reasoning
to achieve the goal and then acts (here, the action is to classify the question). Iteration results from LangChain
interpreting the result of the action, and adding“observations” by reinvoking the LLM with an updated context. This
may result in the LLM possibly repeating its reasoning and acts again based on the updated context.
The question-resolutionλr can similarly be implemented, simply by changing the goal provided (“Resolve incomplete
or ambiguous questions by rewriting them into clear and complete questions’’).
We now consider investigating empirically two variants of a basic interactive question-answering system (Fig. 1). We
note that there is no requirement for the LLM in Fig.1 to be the same as the LLM used by the agent implementing the
transducer. To avoid confusion, we will call the LLM providing the answers as the “responder-LLM” and the LLM
used by the transducer as the “transducer-LLM”.
(a)
(b)
Figure 1: Human-LLM question-answering: (a) Without a question-transducer; and (b) With a question-transducer. For
clarity, we have separated the question from the rest of the context.
4 Empirical Evaluation
4.1 Aims
We intend to test the following conjecture:
• The inclusion of a question-transducer to detect and resolve incomplete or ambiguous questions improves the
interactive question-answering performance of an LLM.
We measure performance by the accuracy of the answer returned by the LLM (using human-labeled ground truth) after
each turn of interaction. Since the transducer necessarily introduces a delay, we will ideally require accuracy to increase
5

NAIK , S RINIVASAN , AGARWAL AND HE
after each turn.3 We test the hypothesis using datasets with varying degrees of incompleteness and ambiguity, and with
transducers constructed with 2 different LLMs (with varying amounts of pre-training and parameters).
4.2 Materials
Datasets
In our empirical study, we evaluate the QA systems on 6 datasets of QA pairs (some datasets also contain some
additional background context for each question), with varying amounts of incompleteness and ambiguity in the
questions. We characterise the datasets into the following categories (Appendix A describes how we arrive at this
categorisation):
Category C1 (Low Incompleteness, Low Ambiguity). SQuAD (Stanford Question Answering Dataset): a widely
used dataset for machine reading comprehension, consisting of over 100,000 questions based on Wikipedia [54].
Category C2 (Low Incompleteness, Mid-to-High Ambiguity) NQ-open (Natural Questions open): a large-scale
benchmark, featuring open domain user queries and answers annotated from Wikipedia articles [37]; and AmbigNQ:
dataset designed to handle ambiguous questions covering 14,042 NQ-open questions[46, 37].
Category C3 (Mid-to-High Incompleteness, Low Ambiguity) MedDialog: covering 0.26 million conversations
between patients and doctors curated to understand real-world medical queries [70].
Category C4 (Mid-to-High Incompleteness, Mid-to-High Ambiguity) MultiWOZ (Multi-domain Wizard-of-Oz): a
dataset covering multiple domains such as hotels, restaurants, and taxis with 8438 dialogues [6]; and ShARC (Shaping
Answers with Rules through Conversation): a multi-turn dataset that focuses on 32k task-oriented conversations with
reasoning covering multiple domains[58].
As explained in Appendix A, the rules used to obtain these categories can only be used to classify interaction sequences,
and therefore cannot be used by a question-transducer during the course of an interaction. Using the terminology
introduced in Sec. 2, each dataset can be seen as a set of interactions, with each interaction being a sequence 1 or
more turns. SQuAD, MultiWOZ and ShARC include some relevant context along with the question in the first turn.
MultiWOZ and MedDialog are interactions between human and LLM agents. In all other cases, interactions are between
human agents.
Algorithms and Machines
We use the following Large Language Models and software: (a) GPT3.5-Turbo and Llama-4-Scout: LLMs are
used to retrieve the answer to the user questions. (b) LangChain: is used to invoke LLMs and initiate agents. All
implementations are in Python 3.10, with API calls to the respective model engine. Experiments are conducted on
a workstation based on Linux (Ubuntu 22.04) with 256GB of RAM, an Intel i9 processor, and an NVIDIA A5000
graphics processor with 24GB of memory.
4.3 Method
We first clarify some preliminary details: (a) Recall data-instances are sets of interactions, with each interaction
being a sequence of 1 or more turns. The first turn containing the question; and the last turn containing the final
answer. Additionally, some datasets have prior context information relevant to the question. For our purpose, it is
sufficient to represent each interactionI as (c,r ) pairs, wherec represents a context sequence (m1,m 2,...,m j) where
m1,...,m j−1 denotes any prior information available and mj =?α(q) is a question. For datasets where no prior
information is available,j = 1. The response r will be a sequence (!α(a)), containing the final answer inI; (b) We
assume the functionsQα(c) andAα(c) return the question ?α(q) and answer !α(c) in any sequence of messages if they
exist, or □ otherwise; (c) We assume a responder-LLMλ that provides a response to a contextc, and denote this by
λ(c)).
With these preliminary clarifications aside, our method is straightforward:
1. For turns k = 1, 2,...,K do:
(a) For each dataset d:
3Or–showing some measure of tolerance–at least after the first turn. However, even this may not be sufficient for improved
performance, since the increase in accuracy may not be substantial enough to tolerate the delay. We comment on these issues in the
section on Results.
6

NAIK , S RINIVASAN , AGARWAL AND HE
i. ObtainCd,k ={(c,r ) : (c,r )∈d,q =Qα(c),a =Aα(r),aλ =Aα(λ(c)), AGREES(a,aλ)} be the
set of responses where the answer from the LLM agrees with that in the dataset
ii. CT,d,k ={(c,r ) : (c,r )∈ d,q = Qα(c),a = Aα(r),aT,λ = Aα(λ(T (c))), AGREES(a,aT,λ)} be
the set of responses where the answer from the LLM using the transduced context agrees with that in
the dataset
iii. CalculateAccd,k =|Cd,k|/|d| (the accuracy without the transducer); and AccT,d,k =|CT,d,l|/|d|,
the accuracy with the transducer
The following additional details are relevant:
• For the experiments reported here, K = 3;
• The responder-LLM in all cases is GPT − 3.5Turbo ;
• The question-transducer is implemented using LangChain agents for question-classification and resolution. In
both cases, the agent is configured to be a 0-shot ReAct agent (see Example 4). It is desirable for the transducer-
LLM to be as lightweight possible (to decrease delays). We report on results withGPT− 3.5−Turbo and
Llama− 4−Scout as the transducer-LLM;
• TheAGREES relation used to obtain the sets of correctly answered questions is a manual verification step,
since we believe this to be most reliable to obtain the statistics we require. It can however entail manual
verification of upto 1800 responses (there are 600 (c,r ) entries overall; and we are examining responses upto
K = 3 turns.
4.4 Results
The principal results from the experiment is in Table 1. A summary of the main findings from the table is: (1) For 5
of the 6 datasets, introducing the transducer increases accuracy (even from the first turn); (2) The gain in accuracy
through the use of the transducer ranges from 3% to 40% by the last turn tabulated; and (3) In 3 datasets the GPT-based
transducer appears to perform better than the Llama-based transducer; and vice versa. Taken together, we believe these
results provide strong support for the experimental conjecture of the use of a transducer being beneficial.
Table 1: Accuracy across datasets comparing QA with and without a transducer. Role of increasing context on the
proportions of correct answers.
Dataset Turns Accuracy
Without With Transducer
Transducer
GPT-based LLaMA-based
SQuAD
1 0.92 0.71 0.75
2 0.95 0.94 0.80
3 0.97 0.97 0.85
NQ-open
1 0.81 0.83 0.80
2 0.87 0.92 0.89
3 0.89 0.94 0.93
AmbigNQ
1 0.63 0.65 0.59
2 0.69 0.86 0.74
3 0.78 0.90 0.81
MedDialog
1 0.00 0.08 0.15
2 0.18 0.36 0.41
3 0.26 0.50 0.66
MultiWOZ
1 0.04 0.22 0.24
2 0.25 0.49 0.52
3 0.48 0.57 0.69
ShARC
1 0.11 0.19 0.12
2 0.60 0.56 0.60
3 0.83 0.82 0.85
We now examine these results in more detail:
When the Transducer Does Not Help. It is evident that the transducer does not help with the SQuaAD dataset. In
our categorisation, this is a dataset with low incompleteness and low ambiguity. That is, questions are largely factual
questions. Additionally, each question has substantial additional context. In other words, almost all questions are
“normal”. In principle, such questions should pass through the transducer unchanged, but clearly the drop in accuracy
7

NAIK , S RINIVASAN , AGARWAL AND HE
suggests that they do not. The problem appears to lie in the Classify function implemented within the transducer. We
examine is next.
The Classify and Resolve Functions. The label distributions across datasets obtained from the Classify function
used by the transducer are in the Table 3 of Appendix B. The tabulation shows that: (a) the two transducer-LLMs behave
very differently; (b) contrary to expectations, neither transducer-LLMs find many questions to be ambiguous (this is
even in a dataset like AmbigNQ, which has been curated to include ambiguous questions; and (c) The proportions of
incomplete and ambiguous questions are quite different to the proportions from the retroactive classification obtained
using the rules in Appendix A. We observe that without Classify the accuracy drops. These 3 observations make it
unclear what form of incompleteness of ambiguity is actually being captured by the agent-based implementation. To
assess the performance of the Resolve function, we need to estimate how often a resolution improved accuracy. This
information is tabulated in Table 4 of Appendix B, and shows probability of improving the accuracy of an answer is
substantially greater if Resolve function transforms the question. This suggests that Resolve is being implemented
substantially more along expected lines than Classify.
Cost of Using a Transducer. Introduction of the transducer introduces costs in the form of increased calls to the
transducer-LLM (and associated time-delays). Table 5 in Appendix B contains estimates of these for each dataset. In
general, the Llama-based transducer appears to make more calls to the transducer-LLM than GPT. This suggests that
using the Llama-based transducer may be costlier–by way of increased latency. This appears to be more likely for
datasets in C3 and C4.
5 Related Work
Preliminary research in QA systems has focused on simple interactions, while this worked adequately for single-turn
queries, they lacked context management required for engaging conversations [48]. Deep learning [72] and transformers
[53, 29] could improve the precision and coherence of interactions. However, maintaining a long context, handling
deficient queries, and aligning responses with user intent still require attention. These issues underscore the need for a
detailed study of human-machine interactions. Recent advances in LLM are changing the story with approaches to
handle human-machine interactions [24, 65]. Researchers are exploring interaction at its crux, focusing on differences
between single-turn and multi-turn interaction [ 69, 7, 38]. A study by [ 61] introduces intelligible interactions for
improving answer quality and proposes a structured protocol for human–LLM communication. While these studies
offer valuable insights, research on understanding and defining interactions at the grassroots in the era of LLM remains
underexplored.
Incompleteness and Ambiguity. LLMs are designed to process and generate human-like text, yet they can still
misinterpret context and provide an inscrutable answer due to deficiencies in the human queries and contextual
information. Providing clarifying feedback helps keep the dialog accurate and easy to understand. To identify when to
ask for feedback, we need to detect when a question is incomplete or ambiguous, i.e, when it contains deficiencies.
To understand incompleteness in questions, [ 2] parse incomplete questions and repair them using human recovery
strategies. They defined queries with missing entities as incomplete questions. Similarly, a study by [36] considers an
incomplete question as one that lacks either of the three: topic presentation, adjective expression, or the inquiry. A
series of techniques are employed to detect ambiguity in the questions [21]. Graphical information is used to define
the ambiguity of a query as concepts covered and the dissimilarities between the answer and the query [ 3]. A few
studies frame it as scope ambiguity when a sentence contains multiple operators and overlapping scope [27]. LLMs are
not predominantly trained to detect and resolve deficiencies, but can be instructed by injecting patterns derived from
human-annotated data [50]. [44] use LLMs to detect ambiguous queries using taxonomies and rewrite the queries in an
enterprise setting. [12] focus on estimating LLM (Palm) confidence when answering ambiguous questions and employ
prompt-based disambiguation, which proves to be sufficiently ineffective. [31] propose leveraging intrinsic knowledge.
It introduces a measure that suggests whether the model considers input as ambiguous based on a pre-defined threshold.
Researchers also evaluate few-shot disambiguation using rephrasing and adding context, finding that adding context
improves the performance [28]. These approaches, though cost-effective, do not guarantee the accuracy and robustness
as compared to fine-tuning. Moreover, fine-tuning itself comes with substantial training and data curation effort. Our
paper builds upon similar veins, using agents to bridge the gap, identify and reduce the concept of incompleteness and
ambiguity in natural language interactions.
6 Conclusion
Our interest is in question-answering (QA) systems in natural language. While the use of natural language has long
been a desirable requirement for interfaces to computers, the possibility of achieving it has proved significantly harder
8

NAIK , S RINIVASAN , AGARWAL AND HE
until the advent and development of large language models (LLMs). Even at this early stage of LLM technology, we are
able to focus on aspects of specific issues that arise with the use of natural language, within the ambit of QA systems. In
this paper, we have concentrated on two such aspects: incompleteness and ambiguity. Both feature during the course of
an interaction in natural language, and we have proposed a simple transducer mechanism for detecting and mitigating
these deficiencies in questions posed to an LLM. The transducer is implemented by LLM-based agents that perform
the functions of detection and resolution of questions with incompleteness or ambiguity. Our results show that in
almost all datasets we tested, the inclusion of the transducer can substantially improve accuracy of answers and shorten
clarificatory interactions. The transducer does not appear to help if the data contains sufficient context information and
the questions do not contain much by way of incompleteness or ambiguity.
Limitations
While our experiments demonstrate the potential of agent-based augmentation to improve question-answering, but
they also point to some aspects that need improvement. First, our assessment of the responses in all cases is by human
verifier. Repetition by other diverse human-verifiers would both mitigate bias and reduce variability. Second, the agentic
pipeline requires multiple API calls per query, which results in increased latency and computational cost. It is helpful to
therefore only invoke the transducer when it is necessary. As we saw in Sec. 4.4, the agent-based implementation of the
Classify function seems quite unpredictable, and in some cases counter-intuitive. It would seem better to construct a
standard discriminative model for Classify. Finally, we have focused on the construction of the transducer: it would
be useful to see if the benefits observed from the use of the transducer also carry over to other responder-LLMs.
