record_id: arxiv:2412.14212
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2412.14212
fetched_title: Tree-of-Code: A Hybrid Approach for Robust Complex Task Planning and Execution
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:01:09Z

Tree-of-Code: A Hybrid Approach for Robust
Complex Task Planning and Execution
Yifan Li∗
Global Innovation Exchange Institution, Tsinghua University
Beijing, China, 100084
yifan-li23@mail.tsinghua.edu.cn
Ziyi Ni∗
Institute of Automation, Chinese Academy of Sciences
Beijing, China, 100190
niziyi2021@ia.ac.cn
Daxiang Dong†
Baidu, Inc.
Beijing, China, 100193
dongdaxiang@baidu.com
Abstract
The exceptional capabilities of large language models (LLMs) have substantially
accelerated the rapid rise and widespread adoption of agents. Recent studies have
demonstrated that generating Python code to consolidate LLM-based agents’ ac-
tions into a unified action space (CodeAct) is a promising approach for developing
real-world LLM agents. However, this step-by-step code generation approach often
lacks consistency and robustness, leading to instability in agent applications, par-
ticularly for complex reasoning and out-of-domain tasks. In this paper, we propose
a novel approach called Tree-of-Code (ToC) to tackle the challenges of complex
problem planning and execution with an end-to-end mechanism. By integrating key
ideas from both Tree-of-Thought and CodeAct, ToC combines their strengths to
enhance solution exploration. In our framework, each final code execution result is
treated as a node in the decision tree, with a breadth-first search strategy employed
to explore potential solutions. The final outcome is determined through a voting
mechanism based on the outputs of the nodes. Experimental results on complicated
task datasets demonstrate that our method provides more stable results compared
to Tree-of-Thought and achieves higher accuracy than CodeAct.
1 Introduction
In recent years, the application of code generation techniques to complex task planning and execution
has garnered significant attention [ 11, 22, 24], particularly with the emergence of CodeAct [ 20]
approaches. CodeAct has demonstrated remarkable efficiency in generating executable code for
complex tasks, improving overall performance in terms of speed and accuracy. However, the lack
of consistent reasoning in CodeAct leads to frequent interruptions during multi-step generation,
causing fragmented and stalled thinking. Additionally, this process accumulates significant model
∗The first two authors contributed equally to this work. † Corresponding author. dongdaxiang@baidu.com
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2412.14212v1 [cs.SE] 18 Dec 2024

hallucinations [13], with increasing randomness, which ultimately undermines the robustness required
for reliably solving complex problems.
To address this challenge, we developed an end-to-end thought-code-execution pipeline that enables
models to autonomously generate plans and decompositions for complex tasks, with clear reasoning.
Post planning, the model produces implementation code that references earlier reasoning and leverages
its innate code processing capabilities, making implicit reasoning explicit through code. Execution
of this code yields results. Inspired by the Tree-of-Thought paradigm, our approach emphasizes
structured solution exploration using decision trees and incorporates continuous code reflection. The
main approach can be summarized into three parts:
1. End-to-End Code Generation: By producing complete code solutions end-to-end, we mini-
mize the need for intermediate reflection on execution results, thus enhancing stability, and
design a long thought-code reasoning process. We introduce ‘llm-function‘ to enable large
models to generate prompts and summarize corresponding outcomes.
2. Exploration of Incomplete Nodes: Leveraging the Tree-of-Thought methodology, we explore
nodes with incomplete execution results by varying prompts, large language models, and
model temperatures to improve result stability.
3. Majority V oting for Final Results: large language models perform majority voting on all
successfully executed nodes to determine the outcome.
The contribution of this paper: 1) We propose the Tree-of-Code method, enhancing stability in
complex task execution through efficient model integration. 2) Our approach can integrate various
large language models without the need to do fine-tuning. 3) empirical validation of improved
problem-solving performance.
2 Related Work
LLM Reasoning: Enhancing reasoning capabilities is a crucial step toward improving general
LLMs. The current mainstream approaches focus on training techniques—such as pretraining [10],
SFT [6], prompt-tuning [ 10], model editing [ 18], and reinforcement learning [ 17, 26]—as well
as the widely used method of prompt engineering to reduce output hallucinations and improve
reasoning [5]. The latter primarily involves designing various frameworks for structured chains of
thought. Longer thought chains seem to always yield better results [26, 21]. The recent success of
GPT-o1 has also highlighted the importance of extended chains of thought (CoT) [ 21]. Notably,
existing CoT method, even with simple prompts like "let’s think step by step," can achieve over a
30% improvement. The Tree of Thoughts (ToT) framework [25] further enhances LLM reasoning
by generating and evaluating intermediate steps, employing search algorithms to systematically
explore and backtrack thought paths, enabling more effective problem-solving. Other emerging
frameworks, like Graph-of-Thought [ 4] and Algorithm-of-Thought [ 16], are also contributing to
this area of research. Code Generation: It is widely accepted that training LLMs with codes can
significantly enhance their reasoning abilities [6, 1, 7, 9, 27]. Furthermore, research has shown that
code, as a formal programming language, closely mirrors logical structures, inherently containing
flow control mechanisms that can stimulate reasoning capabilities. For instance, [20, 9, 19] argue that
code serves as an effective medium for representing reasoning processes. Recent works combining
code with agents have mainly focused on task completion in purely programming-related domains,
such as software development [ 19, 14] and assisting humans in competitive programming tasks
[23, 12]. However, these models do not use code as a scalable language, such as JSON, for direct
communication in everyday tasks. CodeAct [20] attempted to use code directly to solve entire tasks,
but the granularity of each step was too small, leading to error accumulation during function calls.
3 Tree-of-Code: Code Generation Through Tree-Structured Reflection
The Tree-of-Code (ToC) method combines the structured exploration of Tree-of-Thought with
the efficient task planning of CodeAct. ToC introduces a tree-based generation and exploration
mechanism that utilizes various code generation strategies and models, enhancing the robustness
of execution results. By treating code as a form of reasoning, ToC capitalizes on the unique
characteristics of code, such as consistency and determinism, to develop a more effective agent
2

Figure 1: An Overview of our method ToC and CodAct comparisons. (a) CodeAct receives input
and performs a cycle of execution and correction, but the process is carried out in an iterative,
round-by-round manner. (b) ToC applies execution-level reflection in the decision-tree structure.
At each layer, different nodes are executed in parallel; if executed correctly, they are stored in the
candidate pool for voting, if a node fails, it requires further reflection. Yellow blocks mean continued
reflection. Both red and green blocks are done: red blocks are discarded by LLM voting, while green
blocks are collected and accepted.
system with improved interpretability and reduced AI hallucinations. This approach acknowledges
that well-structured planning does not inherently ensure correct code execution. Unlike traditional
reasoning methods, which rely on pre-organized plans, code necessitates a distinct methodology.
Therefore, the code-reasoning process is decomposed into a structured framework that emphasizes
reflection from post-execution feedback to inform iterative improvements. However, this direct
treatment of code as logical reasoning introduces two significant challenges. 1) Limited diversity:
Code generation tends to follow a single path, lacking exploration of alternative branches due to
the inertia of models. 2) Limited strategy: Code generation lacks a systematic approach to evaluate
various options or apply feedback to refine them.
To address these shortcomings, we introduce the Tree of Code (ToC), a framework that allows
models to explore multiple solution paths using a variety of strategies and models, with reflection on
post-generation execution built into the process.
3.1 Overview the Tree-of-Code System
The Tree-of-Code (ToC) framework presents a comprehensive code reasoning process comprising
four key stages: thought, code generation, execution, and reflection. We represent this reasoning
process as a tree T = ( N, L) In contrast to the thought chain series, where thought steps are
organized into nodes (N), our approach emphasizes end-to-end generation. Here, we define nodes as
the combination of code generation and its corresponding execution. This tight coupling between
code and execution results ensures logical consistency and correctness while facilitating high-quality
outcomes for subsequent model training. To enhance post-generation reflection through iterative
refinement, we model the reflection process as lines ( L), which can encompass various strategies
for improvement: 1) System-level reflection: Sampling from diverse models to explore multiple
solutions. 2) Operation-level reflection: Modifying evaluation and reflection strategies to iterative
enhance output. This structured approach guarantees that the final output is both accurate and diverse,
striking a balance between correctness and a variety of reasoning pathways to yield robust solutions.
3

3.2 Thought And Code Generator
Code generation is a critical component of code-as-reasoning. In our framework, the thought and code
generation stage integrates interactions between the user, environment, and agent: The user provides
the task queries. The environment executes the generated code, providing execution feedback. The
agent synthesizes information from the user, environment, and history, translating this into codes,
which it then executes. The process of transforming thought into executable codes can be formalized
as:
Execution(i) = Code(FC(i), FR(i), Thought(i), Functions) ∀i ∈ {1, . . . , n} (1)
where T hought(i) represents the agent’s internal reasoning at step i, and Code (F C(i), F R(i) and
T hought(i), F unctions) converts that reasoning into Python code for execution. F C(i) represents
the code of father node of the current node. F R(i) represents the code execution result of father node
of the current node. F unctions represent all the tools that current task can use.
To generate an end-to-end solution for current task, we add a llm-function tool into Functions set.
With llm-function, our code generation LLMs will generate prompt from the current context and call
llm-function to generate final results.
3.3 Tree Expansion and State Evaluation
We initialize from a root node and do tree expansion recursively based on termination criteria. Every
time a node’s code is executed, state evaluation will be executed based on the code execution results.
The process is as follows: 1) The process starts at the root node, expanding the tree incrementally,
with each node representing generated thoughts, code, and execution results. 2) Generated codes of
each leaf node will be executed in a Python environment. When errors are detected, child nodes are
expanded from the erroneous node to analyze specific issues and explore alternative solutions. 3)
This expansion continues until all leaf nodes execute successfully or a maximum depth is reached.
This strategy effectively manages complexity and ensures correct and efficient code execution results.
3.4 Final Result Generator
After candidate outputs from all executed nodes are collected, these results undergo a majority vote
and tragic summarization process to determine the most likely single answer. Explanations of the
final answer are not included, just the precise answer to the question is shown.
4 Experiment and Analysis
Our experiments evaluated the effectiveness of the ToC framework, comparing its performance
primarily against the CodeAct framework. We used the M 3ToolEval, a newly curated benchmark
for evaluating performance across complex multi-scene tasks, the same used in CodeAct [ 20], to
benchmark ToC. We evaluated the input samples from M3ToolEval. The context window was fixed at
3k tokens, and the generation depth was set at 3 for consistency in computational costs. To highlight
the superiority of our method, we directly compared it to the best-performing model in CodeAct,
which is based on GPT-4. In the tests, ToC achieved a 7.2% higher accuracy than CodeAct in tasks,
and it reduced interaction steps significantly, demonstrating overall effectiveness and robustness in
task completion, as Table 1 shows.
To ensure diverse outputs, we applied a multi-level sampling strategy: 1) Model Diversity: A range of
generative models (e.g., GPT-4 [2], ERNIE-4.0-Turbo [15], DeepSeek Coder [8], and Claude 3.5 [3])
was utilized to introduce variability at the model level. 2) Temperature Variability: Adjustments
to generation temperatures were made within specified bounds to encourage content variation. 3)
Prompt Variation: Different role instructions and adaptive strategies were explored to further enhance
adaptive diversity.
Further analysis compared ToC against both the JSON-based and thought-based modes of CodeAct.
Across all criteria, ToC consistently outperformed other traditional reasoning frameworks, particularly
in managing complex reasoning tasks.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we introduced the Tree-of-Code (ToC) method, which combines the strengths of
Tree-of-Thought and CodeAct to enhance model robustness and accuracy. Both thought and code
4

Table 1: Performance Comparison
Model Name Action Mode Average Turns Correct %
ToC1 code_as_reasoning 2.3 81.60%
CodeAct2
code_as_reasoning 5.5 74.40%
json_as_reasoning 7.6 52.40%
text_as_reasoning 7.7 53.70%
1 Mix-modal sampling for Toc.
2 GPT-4, best performance model for CodeAct.
generation in our approach might intrigue internal processes of reasoning, while the decision-tree
structured exploration enables reflection based on external execution. With efficient model integration
and prompt optimization, we achieved results significantly surpassing the baselines on complex task
datasets. Furthermore, our ongoing, yet unpublished, work suggests that this approach will yield
similarly promising results in real-world applications and better performance after few-shot SFT.
These results will be shared in future work—stay tuned.
