record_id: arxiv:2608.13450
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.13450
fetched_title: LLM-Assisted Dynamic Threat Analysis for Attacker-Reachable Software Weaknesses in Autonomous Vehicles
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:08Z

LLM-Assisted Dynamic Threat Analysis for Attacker-Reachable Software Weaknesses in
Autonomous Vehicles
Md. Wasiul Haque*
Department of Civil, Construction & Environmental Engineering, The University of Alabama
2009 Smart Communities and Innovation Building (SCIB), 28 Kirkbride Lane,
Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0288
ORCID: 0009-0007-8417-9261
Email: mhaque16@crimson.ua.edu
Sagar Dasgupta, Ph.D.
Department of Civil, Construction & Environmental Engineering, The University of Alabama
2009 Smart Communities and Innovation Building (SCIB), 28 Kirkbride Lane,
Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0288
ORCID: 0000-0001-8491-662X
Email: sdasgupta@ua.edu
Mizanur Rahman, Ph.D.
Department of Civil, Construction & Environmental Engineering, The University of Alabama
2007 Smart Communities and Innovation Building (SCIB), 28 Kirkbride Lane,
Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0288
ORCID: 0000-0003-1128-753X
Email: mizan.rahman@ua.edu
Md Rayhanur Rahman, Ph.D.
Department of Computer Science, The University of Alabama
3017 Cyber Hall, 248 Kirkbride Lane,
Tuscaloosa, AL 35487-0288
ORCID: 0000-0003-4980-7350
Email: mrahman87@ua.edu
Total Number of Pages: 17
Submitted: August 13, 2026
*Corresponding author
1
arXiv:2608.13450v1 [cs.SE] 13 Aug 2026

Haque, Dasgupta, Rahman, and Rahman
ABSTRACT
Objectives:As autonomous vehicles reach public roads, their software becomes safety-critical. A defect reachable
from an attacker input can change how a vehicle steers or brakes. Static analysis flags many candidate sites, but
confirming one is reachable and exploitable needs executable artifacts whose manual construction is the bottleneck.
We ask whether large language models (LLMs) can automate this for the open-source stack Autoware.
Methods:Weperformacompiler-precisestaticanalysisofAutoware(185packages),recovering1,375decisionrules,
2,274validationchecks,and482input-to-safety-outputflows,fromwhichwederiveaweaknesstaxonomyandasample
of 740 reachable sites. For each site, 2 local open-weight LLMs, a no-static-context ablation, and a naive-template
baseline generate artifacts. All 3,700 sets are compiled against the real build under sanitizers, repaired via a compiler
in-the-loop stage, and fuzzed when they compile.
Findings:The principal result is a build-integration failure taxonomy that locates the binding constraint one stage
before the fuzzer: 80% of first-shot compile failures arise from dependency-wiring rather than program logic. The
reasoningmodelcompiled64%ofitsharnessesfirst,against6%forthecode-specializedmodel,andrepairreachedfull
object-compileabilityforthereasoningmodelonlybystubbingtherealtarget;consequently,underhalfofitsharnesses
reached the fuzzer and all 37 crashes came from a stub. Within budget, no candidate weakness was dynamically
confirmed, reflecting this build-integration barrier rather than a benign attack surface.
Novelty:Thefirstend-to-endfeasibilitystudyofLLM-assisteddynamicanalysisonafullAVstack,pairingrepository-
scale static candidate identification with LLM-generated confirmation and pinpointing where the automation fails.
Practical Applications:Scalable software-safety assurance is a prerequisite for automated driving. Unaided LLM-
assisted dynamic analysis is not yet a trustworthy assurance stage; effort is better spent on build integration than on
prompt design, while the static analysis already guides safety review.
2

Haque, Dasgupta, Rahman, and Rahman
INTRODUCTION
Autonomousvehicles(AVs)aremovingfromcontrolledtestenvironmentstopublicroads,makingsoftwarecorrectness
a matter of transportation safety rather than software engineering alone. A modern automated-driving stack is a large,
distributed, real-time system that processes sensor and network data and produces steering, acceleration, and braking
commands. As externally supplied values may traverse many interacting components before influencing actuation, a
reachable software defect may become a safety hazard for the vehicle, its occupants, and other road users. Assuring
software of this scale remains fundamentally difficult (Haque et al. 2025; Koopman and Wagner 2016; Kalra and
Paddock 2016),andfunctional-safetyandautomotive-cybersecuritystandardsrequiredeveloperstoidentifyhazardous
behavior and demonstrate that it cannot be triggered under relevant operating and threat conditions (International
Organization for Standardization 2018; International Organization for Standardization and SAE International 2021).
A central assurance challenge is the gap between identifying a potential weakness and confirming it at run
time. Static analysis of the source code can examine an entire repository and locate sites where externally influenced
values reach safety-relevant decisions, validation is weak or absent, or data propagate toward consequential outputs
(Haqueetal. 2025). Suchsitesarecandidates,notconfirmedfindings. Staticevidencealonedoesnotestablishruntime
reachability, path feasibility, or a security- or safety-relevant effect (Aggarwal and Jalote 2006).
Closing this gap requires an executable artifact that constructs the required state, delivers adversarial inputs
to the flagged code, and observes the result (Aggarwal and Jalote 2006). The main obstacle is often not the fuzzer
or sanitizer, both of which are mature (Fioraldi et al. 2020; Serebryany et al. 2012; LLVM Project 2024a; Manès
et al. 2021), but the construction of the harness itself. A valid harness must satisfy target types, initialization
requirements,messageformats,middlewaredependencies,packageboundaries,andbuildconfiguration. InAVstacks,
generated middleware artifacts like Robot Operating System (ROS) 2 (Macenski et al. 2022) interfaces, lifecycle
assumptions, and cross-package dependencies make this process particularly difficult. Recent work shows that large
language models (LLMs) can generate fuzz drivers, test programs, and structured inputs with varying success (Deng
et al. 2023; Xia et al. 2024; Zhang et al. 2024; Google 2024; Hou et al. 2024). This motivates the central question
of the study: can an LLM automate artifact construction for a production-scale automated-driving stack and enable
dynamic confirmation at a scale impractical for manual effort?
Weinvestigatethisquestionthroughanend-to-endfeasibilitystudyofAutoware(AutowareFoundation 2026).
Wefirstidentifysiteswhereexternallyinfluenceddatainteractwithsafety-relevantdecisions,validationlogic,oroutput
paths, and use this evidence to characterize the attack surface and derive a weakness taxonomy. From this population,
we select a stratified sample and provide the associated code and static context to two local, open-weight LLMs. Each
model generates an executable artifact for the selected target. The artifacts are compiled and linked against the native
Autoware build with sanitizers enabled. Failed artifacts enter a compiler-in-the-loop repair process, and successful
ones are executed under a fixed fuzzing budget. This design evaluates the full path from static candidate identification
to dynamic confirmation while exposing the intermediate failures that prevent execution. The study addresses the
following research questions:
RQ1:What classes of potentially exploitable weaknesses are reachable from external inputs in a production-
scale automated-driving stack, and can LLM-generated dynamic artifacts confirm those weaknesses within a fixed
analysis budget?
RQ2:To what extent can LLM-assisted dynamic analysis refine, correct, or extend the conclusions produced
by static analysis alone, and what factors prevent it from doing so?
RQ3:How does model choice affect artifact validity, target-code reachability, and the severity of confirmed
findings,and,whennofindingsareconfirmed, howdoesitaffecttheintermediateoutcomes, includingcompileability,
failure mode, and generation cost that determine whether dynamic analysis can proceed?
Inourexperiment,theresultsprovideanegativebutinformativeassessmentofcurrentfeasibility. Nocandidate
wasdynamicallyconfirmedwithintheallocatedfuzzingbudget,primarilybecausemostgeneratedartifactsfailedbefore
meaningful execution rather than because Autoware’s attack surface was shown to be benign. Unaided LLM outputs
rarelycompiledandlinkedagainstthenativebuild,whilecompiler-guidedrepairraisedobjectcompileabilityto100%
for the stronger model largely by introducing stubs or replacement implementations that bypassed the intended target.
Thestudythereforeidentifiesfaithfulbuildintegrationandverifiedtargetexecution,ratherthaninputgenerationalone,
as the principal barrier to LLM-assisted dynamic confirmation. Based on this investigation, the paper makes the
following contributions:
•We provide a repository-scale, compiler-precise characterization of an open-source AV stack, Autoware’s
safety-relevant attack surface, comprising 1,375 decision rules, 2,274 validation checks, and 482 input-to-
safety-output paths across 185 packages. From this evidence, we derive a weakness taxonomy grounded in
3

Haque, Dasgupta, Rahman, and Rahman
observed Autoware code patterns rather than in a generic vulnerability catalog.
•We develop an end-to-end and reproducible pipeline that carries each static candidate through LLM-based
artifact generation, integration with the native Autoware build, sanitizer-enabled compilation, compiler-
guided repair, fixed-budget fuzzing, and post-execution triage.
•We conduct a controlled comparison of 2 LLMs, together with a no-static-context ablation and a naive
baseline, to determine how model capability and contextual information affect artifact construction and
target-code reachability.
•We derive a build-integration failure taxonomy that identifies the stages at which LLM-assisted dynamic
analysis breaks down on a codebase of this scale and distinguishes genuine target execution from artifacts
that achieve nominal compilation by replacing, bypassing, or stubbing the intended implementation.
The remainder of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work on software assurance,
fuzzing, and LLM-assisted testing. Section 3 surveys automated-driving software stacks and motivates the selection
of Autoware, while Section 4 defines the threat model. Section 5 presents the static analysis and weakness taxonomy.
Section 6 describes the analysis pipeline, and Section 7 presents the experimental setup, reports the results, followed
by their interpretation in Section 8. Section 9 discusses limitations, threats to validity, and concludes the paper.
RELATED WORK
Confirming security-relevant weaknesses in automated-driving software requires several complementary capabilities:
understanding how untrusted inputs propagate through the stack, identifying suspicious code paths at repository scale,
exercising those paths dynamically, and constructing the artifacts needed to make such execution possible. This
section reviews the corresponding foundations in automated-driving software assurance, static analysis and fuzzing,
and LLM-assisted software testing, and positions the present study at their intersection.
Automated-Driving Software and Safety Context
Modern AV stacks are distributed, real-time systems spanning perception, localization, prediction, planning, con-
trol, and map processing. Open platforms commonly use middlewares like ROS 2, where nodes exchange serialized
messages through a Data Distribution Service (DDS)-based publish–subscribe model (Macenski et al. 2022). Dese-
rialization and subscription callbacks mark the point where external bytes become typed C++ objects, making them
naturalentrypointsforbothattacker-controlleddataandfuzzinginputs. Systembehavioralsodependsonlaunchfiles,
parameters, topic remappings, and cross-package dependencies, allowing inputs to traverse several domains before
affecting control. SAE J3016 defines automation levels (SAE International 2021), ISO 26262 addresses functional
safety(InternationalOrganizationforStandardization 2018),andISO/SAE21434addressesvehiclecybersecurity(In-
ternational Organization for Standardization and SAE International 2021). Because the behavioral space cannot be
covered by road testing alone (Haque et al. 2025; Koopman and Wagner 2016; Kalra and Paddock 2016), scalable
software-level assurance is required.
Static Analysis, Fuzzing, and Harness Construction
The static stage builds on sound program analysis (Cousot and Cousot 1977) and Low Level Virtual Machine
(LLVM)/Clang (Lattner and Adve 2004; LLVM Project 2024b). Clang analyzes each translation unit under its actual
build configuration, including generated interfaces, include paths, and preprocessor definitions. Tools like CodeQL
provide a complementary repository-scale approach to control- and data-flow analysis (GitHub 2026). Static findings
remain candidates because reported paths may be infeasible, unreachable, or harmless at run time. Coverage-guided
fuzzing and sanitizers provide the mechanisms needed to test them (Manès et al. 2021; Fioraldi et al. 2020; LLVM
Project 2024a; Serebryany et al. 2012), and continuous-fuzzing systems demonstrate their scalability when suitable
targets exist (Serebryany 2017). These tools require an executable harness that compiles, links, initializes the target,
and carries fuzzer-controlled data into the intended implementation. In Autoware, this may involve generated ROS 2
types, node state, package dependencies, and middleware initialization. Classical fuzz-driver synthesis can infer
Application Programming Interface (API) usage from examples (Ispoglou et al. 2020), but is less effective for targets
embedded in distributed node architectures and large build graphs.
LLMs for Software Testing and Security
LLMsareincreasinglyusedforcodegeneration,debugging,testing,vulnerabilityanalysis,andrepair(Houetal. 2024).
In fuzzing, they have generated programs and inputs for deep-learning frameworks and general software (Deng
et al. 2023; Xia et al. 2024), guided protocol fuzzing (Meng et al. 2024), drafted continuous-fuzzing har-
4

Haque, Dasgupta, Rahman, and Rahman
nesses (Google 2024), and generated library fuzz drivers (Zhang et al. 2024). LLM agents have also constructed
exploits from known vulnerability descriptions (Fang et al. 2024). Many approaches use iterative repair: the artifact
is compiled, diagnostics are returned, and the model revises its output. Our compiler-in-the-loop process follows
this reasoning-and-acting pattern (Yao et al. 2023). However, compilation alone does not ensure semantic fidelity.
A model may remove dependencies, replace implementations, or introduce stubs that bypass the real target. These
artifacts cannot confirm the original candidate.
Positioning of This Study
Most LLM-based fuzz-driver studies evaluate isolated programs, libraries, or APIs. Our study integrates repository-
scale static analysis, candidate-guided LLM generation, native-build compilation and repair, fuzzing, and target-
reachability verification. This design distinguishes failures in candidate selection, generation, build integration, and
execution. Toourknowledge,itisthefirstend-to-endfeasibilitystudyofLLM-assisteddynamicanalysisonacomplete
autonomous driving stack that treats build integration and real target execution as primary outcomes.
AUTONOMOUS VEHICLE SOFTWARE STACKS AND THE STUDY SUBJECT
Autonomous driving software ranges from proprietary commercial systems to fully open-source platforms (Yurtsever
etal. 2020). Becauseourmethodrequiressourcecode,compilermetadata,packagedependencies,andthenativebuild
environment, only open platforms are suitable. Table 1 and Figure 1 summarize this landscape. Commercial systems
such as Waymo, Cruise, Aurora, Tesla FSD, Mobileye, and NVIDIA DRIVE are proprietary. Waymo has published
elements of its Level 4 safety-case methodology (Webb et al. 2020), while Mobileye introduced the Responsibility-
Sensitive Safety model (Shalev-Shwartz et al. 2017); however, none exposes the source and build system required
for our analysis. Among open platforms, Autoware and Apollo provide the most complete deployment-oriented
stacks. Autoware is a ROS 2-based Level 3–4 platform maintained by the Autoware Foundation and released under
Apache 2.0 (Kato et al. 2018; Autoware Foundation 2026). Apollo is a similarly comprehensive Apache-licensed
stack (Baidu 2024; Jung et al. 2025). openpilot is limited to Level 2 driver assistance (comma.ai 2024), while Pylot
is primarily a modular research platform (Gog et al. 2021).
TABLE 1 Representative Automated-Driving Software Stacks
Stack Developer Access Scope
Waymo Driver Waymo (Alphabet) Proprietary Level 4 Robotaxi
Cruise General Motors Proprietary Level 4 Robotaxi
Aurora Driver Aurora Proprietary Level 4, Autonomous trucking
Tesla FSD Tesla Proprietary Vision-centric Level 2, Fleet scale
Mobileye Mobileye (Intel) Proprietary Camera-based ADAS to Level 4; RSS model
NVIDIA DRIVE NVIDIA Proprietary Compute and software SDK for AD
Autoware Autoware Foundation Open (Apache 2.0) ROS 2 full Level 3-4 stack
Apollo Baidu Open (Apache 2.0) Full stack; Widely used
openpilot comma.ai Open (MIT) Level 2 driver assistance on consumer cars
Pylot Research Open (Apache 2.0) Modular research AD platform
Sourceandbuild-systemavailabilitywereessentialbecausethepipelineanalyzescompilerrepresentationsand
compiles generated artifacts against the native implementation, excluding proprietary platforms. System scope further
narrowedthecandidatestocompleteautomated-drivingstacks,favoringAutowareandApolloovernarrowerplatforms
such as openpilot and Pylot. Autoware was ultimately chosen for its compatibility with the proposed workflow.
Its ROS 2 architecture exposes message interfaces, package boundaries, launch configurations, dependencies, and a
reproduciblecolcon-based build with package-level compile databases.
THREAT MODEL
Weconsiderasoftware-leveladversarycapableofinfluencingoneormoreinputstotheAutowarenodegraph. Attacks
requiring physical access to the vehicle, sensors, or environment are out of scope. The adversary may act through
four channels aligned with the input sources traced in our static analysis: (i) the adversary may inject a malicious or
spoofed sensor stream into a perception or localization topic; (ii) a rogue DDS participant may join the ROS 2 graph
andpublishtoorsubscribefromsafety-relevanttopics,withoutanenforcedsecuritypolicy,DDSdiscoverymayadmit
5

Haque, Dasgupta, Rahman, and Rahman
Source Availability
Closed / proprietary Open source
System Scope
Driver assistance (L2) Full stack (L3–L4)
Waymo
Cruise
Aurora
NVIDIA DRIVE
Tesla FSD
Mobileye
Apollo
Pylot
openpilot
Autoware
Open + full stack:
source-level analysis feasible
FIGURE 1 Automated-driving software stacks positioned by source availability and system scope. Autoware,
highlighted in the figure, is selected as the subject of this study.
previously unknown participants (Macenski et al. 2022; Dieber et al. 2017); (iii) a compromised upstream node
may emit well-typed but semantically adversarial messages, including stale, inconsistent, out-of-range, non-finite, or
boundary values; and (iv) the adversary may manipulate map, route, or localization inputs consumed at startup or
during execution.
Theadversaryaimstocausedenialofserviceinasafety-criticalnode,corruptperceptionorlocalizationstate,
induceunsafeplanningorcontroldecisions,orsilentlydegrademotion-relatedoutputswithoutproducinganimmediate
crash. Figure 2, derived from the static ROS 2 interface inventory, illustrates how these inputs cross into perception,
localization, planning, and control logic before reaching safety-relevant outputs. We exclude physical sensor spoofing
and adversarial perturbations against learned perception models (Cao et al. 2019; Sato et al. 2021), supply-chain
compromise of code, dependencies, models, or build artifacts, and attacks on V2X or roadside infrastructure. All
experiments are conducted in software-in-the-loop.
Autoware trust boundary: 248 subscriptions
Attacker-controlled
inputs
• Spoofed sensor feed
• Rogue DDS participant
• Compromised upstream
node
• Malicious map /
localization
Perception 68
Localization 70
Planning 54
Control 47
Map 5
Prediction 4
Privileged
planning / control
/ localization logic
1,375 decision rules
2,274 validation checks
Safety-relevant
outputs
trajectory, control_cmd,
gear, hazard, emergency
482 flows
FIGURE2 TrustboundaryovertheAutowarenodegraph,derivedfromthestaticinterfaceinventory. Attacker-
controlled inputs reach each domain’s subscription surface, which feeds privileged decision logic and safety-
relevant outputs.
6

Haque, Dasgupta, Rahman, and Rahman
SAFETY-RELEVANT ATTACK SURFACE OF AUTOWARE
Beforedynamicconfirmation,weidentifywheresafety-relevantweaknessesmayplausiblyoccur. Thissectionpresents
therepository-scalestaticanalysisusedtocharacterizeAutoware’sattacksurface,selectcandidatesfordynamictesting,
andderivetheweaknesstaxonomy. Allreportedcountsandfiguresaregeneratedbytheanalysispipelineandreleased
with the accompanying artifacts.
Analysis Method and Scale
Whole-repository extraction identifies packages, domains, deployed sources, dependencies, and ROS interfaces while
excluding non-deployment code. Clang then processes each translation unit under its exported build configuration to
recoverifandswitchconditions and a simplified call graph. Launch and YAML files provide node composition,
remappings, and runtime configuration, with CodeQL used as a complementary cross-check (GitHub 2026). Finally,
classifiers label safety-relevant decisions and validation checks, and a heuristic package-level analysis links input
subscriptions to consequential outputs.
Thepipelineanalyzes185packagesand1,857sourcefilesaslistedinTable2. Itrecovers786ROSinterfaces,
comprising 248 subscriptions, 500 publishers, and 38 services, together with 1,816 parameter surfaces and 2,749
compiler-precise condition sites. Figure 3(a) summarizes the recovered surface.
Planning Perception Control Localization Map Prediction
100
101
102
103
Count (log scale)
1161
3
203
8
963 860
151
247
53
94 66
161 156
1 4
(a)
Decision rules Validation checks Input output flows
0 500 1000 1500
Number of validation checks
range/threshold
container
null
timeout
generic
numeric/validity
safety
1789
391
43
22
18
6
5
(b)
security-relevant
coverage-oriented
0 100 200 300 400
Decision-rule candidates
control_command_gate
rtc_interface
path_sampler
emergency_braking
velocity_planner
vehicle_cmd_gate
route_handler
freespace_planning
velocity_smoother
path_planner
42
50
62
67
80
86
116
165
215
410
(c)
FIGURE 3 Autoware’s safety-relevant static surface. (a) Decision rules, validation checks, and heuristic input-
to-output flows by domain (log scale) (b) Validation checks by type (c) The ten most decision-dense packages.
Structure of the Attack Surface
Safety-relevant decision logic is abundant and distributed: the pipeline recovers 1,375 candidates, concentrated in
planning (1,161) and control (203), across route management, velocity regulation, command gating, emergency
braking, and shared planning infrastructure. The heuristic analysis recovers 482 package-level paths, concentrated in
the vehicle command gate, external command selector, and control command gate, with representative examples in
Table 3. Because this analysis is not fully interprocedural or taint-precise, it supports prioritization rather than proof
of attacker-to-actuation reachability. Validation is also uneven: among 2,274 recovered checks, 1,789 are range or
threshold guards and 391 are container checks, compared with 43 null checks, 22 timeout or staleness checks, and 6
numeric-validity checks. These are summarized in Figures 3(b) and 3(c).
7

Haque, Dasgupta, Rahman, and Rahman
TABLE 2 Repository-Scale Static-Analysis Inventory for Autoware
Quantity Count
Relevant packages 185
Source files in scope 1,857
ROS interfaces (subs / pubs / services) 786 (248/500/38)
Parameter surfaces 1,816
Compiler-precise condition sites 2,749
Decision-rule candidates 1,375
Validation checks 2,274
Heuristic input-to-output paths 482
Call-graph edges 1,052
TABLE 3 Representative Attacker-Influenced Flows from Input to Safety-Relevant Output
Domain Input topic→package→safety output
Controlinput/external_emergency_stop_heartbeat→vehicle_cmd_gate→output/vehicle_cmd_emergency
Planning~/input/odometry→mission_planner→output/goal_pose
Perception~/input/image→bevfusion→~/output/objects
Localization~/input/pose_with_covariance→yabloc_particle_filter→~/output/weighted_particles
Table 4 organizes the recovered evidence into four operational weakness classes used for candidate selection,
dynamiclabeling,andseverityanalysisundertheadaptedCVSS/RVSSframework(FIRST.org 2019;Mayoral-Vilches
et al. 2018). The taxonomy does not classify every site as vulnerable; it identifies the mechanism through which
externally influenced data may affect safety-relevant behavior.
TABLE 4 Weakness Taxonomy Derived from the Static Analysis
Category Description Static basis
Decision-policy guard Conditional controlling a safety-relevant branch (stop, yield, emergency, gate-
mode, geometry).
1,375 rules
Validation weakness Missing or weak range, container, null/optional, timeout, or numeric-validity
guard on an externally influenced input.
2,274 checks
Input dependency Site fed by an attacker-influenced subscription or parameter close to an actuation
output.
482 flows
State dispatchswitchor mode selection over an externally influenced state variable. subset of conditions
LLM-ASSISTED DYNAMIC ANALYSIS APPROACH
The pipeline spans five phases, as illustrated in Figure 4: (i) static candidate identification (Phase 0); (ii) artifact
generation (Phase 1); (iii) build integration and dynamic execution (Phase 2); (iv) triage of each execution outcome
(Phase 3); and (v) aggregation across conditions (Phase 4). This section describes static candidate identification in
Phase 0 and the dynamic workflow spanning Phases 1–4. To support a controlled comparison, the prompt template,
targetcontext,decodingparameters,buildenvironment,andexecutionbudgetareheldconstantacrossconditions. The
model is the only varying factor, except in the ablation condition, where the static-analysis context is withheld.
Target Selection
The dynamic study evaluates the full set of high-priority candidates identified by the static analysis rather than a
manually selected sample. Section 5 recovers 2,749 compiler-precise condition sites across 185 packages and assigns
each a safety-relevance score from 0 to 11. The score rewards actuation-related terms (+3), validation or bounds
checks (+2), external ROS input exposure (+2), presence on an input-to-safety-output flow (+3), and membership in a
safety-critical domain (+1). Sites scoring (≥8) are classified as P1, those scoring 5–7 as P2, and the remainder as P3.
All P1 and P2 sites are retained, yielding 740 targets: 214 in P1 and 526 in P2, spanning 34 packages and 107 source
8

Haque, Dasgupta, Rahman, and Rahman
Phase 0 — Static analysis
Clang AST, ROS
interfaces, flow tracing
target_sites.csv +
weakness taxonomy
(stratified candidate sites)
Phase 1 —
Artifact generation
2 LLMs × {static,
no-ctx} + baseline
harness.cpp, mutator.py,
fault_injection.yaml
Phase 2 — Compile
real build flags, ASan/UBSan
compiles?
Link libFuzzer binary
links?
Fuzz for fixed budget
crash?
Phase 3 — Triage
dedup, reachability,
taxonomy, severity
real &
reachable?
Confirmed weakness
yes
yes
yes
yes
Repair: return
clang errors to the
model (≤3 rounds)
no
prompt template+ static
context (source, finding, topics)
Build-failure taxonomy
Not-exercised
Disconfirmed
False positive
(stub bug)
if still failing
no
no
no
Phase 4 — Aggregation
model comparison, compile-failure
taxonomy, summary
FIGURE 4 End-to-end LLM-assisted dynamic-analysis pipeline. Solid arrows show progression through the
five phases, the purple loop denotes compiler-guided repair, and decision nodes classify each harness as a build
failure, not exercised, disconfirmed, false positive, or confirmed weakness before Phase 4 aggregation.
9

Haque, Dasgupta, Rahman, and Rahman
files. Table5presentsthecompositionbydomainandtier. Theselectionisdeterministic,reproducible,andexhaustive
within these tiers.
TABLE 5 Composition of the 740-Target Census by Domain and Priority Tier (Every P1 and P2 Site; P3
Excluded)
Domain P1 P2 Total
Planning 129 232 361
Control 59 79 138
Perception 6 118 124
Localization 20 95 115
Map 0 2 2
Total 214 526 740
Artifact Generation
For each target, a fixed prompt template is populated with the target metadata and static-analysis context. The context
includes the relevant source window, the candidate description, and the recovered input topics and safety-relevant
outputs, as illustrated in Figure 5. The template, context fields, and decoding parameters are identical across models.
The no-static-context ablation receives only target metadata, while a deterministic baseline produces metadata-based
scaffolds as a naive lower bound. All prompts and raw responses are retained for reproducibility.
Eachtargetproducesfourartifacts: (i)afunction-levellibFuzzerharness,(ii)aROS2messagemutator,(iii)a
software-in-the-loopfault-injectionspecification,and(iv)anASan/UBSanbuildconfiguration. Themutatorgenerates
malformed, boundary, and timing-variant messages, while the fault-injection specification defines bounded message
drops, delays, stale replays, and NaN/Inf perturbations.
Artifact template
harness / mutator /
fault-injection (fixed wording)
Target metadata
package, file, function,
condition, tier
Static context
source window, finding, input
topics, safety outputs
Prompt Designer
fills one template with the
fields; identical template and
context across all models
(the controlled variable)
Condition switch
static | no-static
Rendered prompt
system role
task: generate <artifact>
target metadata
[static context]
“return only the artifact”
LLM
codestral:22b,
gpt-oss:20b
drops static context in the ablation
FIGURE 5 The prompt designer for Phase 1
Build Integration and Repair
Each harness is compiled against the pinned Autoware revision using the target translation unit’s include paths,
preprocessor definitions, and compiler options fromcompile_commands.json. Compilation usesclang++with
AddressSanitizer and UndefinedBehaviorSanitizer. We define compileability as successful object compilation against
the real Autoware headers and APIs, a less stringent criterion than linking or execution. All attempts are logged
and classified using a fixed error taxonomy. Failed harnesses enter a compiler-in-the-loop repair process for up to 3
rounds. ThemodelreceivesthefailingsourceandClangdiagnostics,whiletheoriginaloutputisretainedtodistinguish
first-shotfrompost-repaircompileability. Intheno-static-contextcondition,repairusesonlythegeneratedartifactand
compiler feedback; the withheld static context is not reintroduced.
10

Haque, Dasgupta, Rahman, and Rahman
Triage and Aggregation
Compiled harnesses are linked into libFuzzer executables and run under a fixed budget. A harness is considered valid
only if it invokes the intended Autoware implementation and carries fuzzer-controlled input to the target. Crashes
are deduplicated and manually assessed for reachability, reproducibility, and security or safety impact. A candidate
is classified as confirmed when the real target is exercised and a reproducible weakness is observed, and as a false
positive when the crash originates outside the target. A target exercised for the full budget without a relevant failure
is disconfirmed within that budget, whereas a harness that does not reach the intended code or fuzzing stage is not
exercised. This distinction prevents build and integration failures from being treated as evidence against the static
candidate.
EVALUATION AND RESULTS
Thissectionreportstheend-to-endoutcomesforthe740targetsselectedinSection5. Acrossthe5conditionsdefined
inSection7,thepipelinegenerated3,700artifactsets,compiledandlinkedthemagainstthesanitizedAutowarebuild,
repairedfailuresthroughthecompiler-in-the-loopprocess,andfuzzedthesurvivingharnesses. Becausetheresultsare
dominated by failures before execution, we organize them by pipeline stage rather than by research question.
Model Configuration and Parameters
The experimental setup is designed to compare model behavior under a common execution environment. We evaluate
two local, open-weight LLMs served through an Ollama OpenAI-compatible endpoint: one code-specialized model
and one general reasoning model. Using models with different capabilities helps separate model-specific effects from
those introduced by the prompt and pipeline design. All experiments target the same Autoware workspace and use
a configured fuzzing budget of 600 seconds per target. For harnesses that successfully linked, the realized execution
time was 60 seconds per target. Table 6 summarizes the complete configuration.
TABLE 6 Experimental Configuration
Field Value
Target subject Autoware (cloned on 10 February 2026)
Models (LLM)codestral:22b(code-specialized);gpt-oss:20b(open-weight reasoning)
Decoding temperature 0.1, max_tokens 4096
Conditions 2 models×{static, no-static} + naive baseline
Build repair compiler-in-the-loop, up to 3 rounds
Hardware Intel i9-14900F (32 threads); NVIDIA RTX 4090 (24GB)
Sample 740 sites, stratified by domain×priority, seed 202707
Sanitizers AddressSanitizer + UndefinedBehaviorSanitizer
A harness provides evidence about Autoware only if it compiles against the target package, links to the real
implementation rather than substituted stubs, and exercises the flagged branch at run time. Only then can a crash, or
its absence, be attributed to the target code. We therefore present the results as attrition through these gates: build
integration and target reachability, which address RQ1 and RQ2; the effects of model choice and compiler-guided
repair, which address RQ3; and the evidence provided by the few harnesses that reach execution.
Build Integration Analysis (RQ1, RQ2)
Noweaknesswasconfirmedacrossthe5conditionsand740targets. Giventhethinvalidationandplausibleactuation-
facing paths identified in Section 5, this result reflects failure before meaningful fuzzing rather than evidence of a
benign attack surface. Of the 2,960 LLM-generated harnesses, 2,259 failed to compile initially. As shown in Table 7,
1,436 omitted required ROS or Autoware headers and 381 included target.cppfiles through invalid paths, together
accounting for 1,817 of 2,259 failures. The remainder comprised API mismatches (225), signature mismatches (110),
syntax errors (81), and 26 other errors. Build integration therefore prevented most artifacts from confirming or
refuting their static candidates. Table 7 also shows distinct model behavior: the code-specialized model failed mainly
on dependency wiring, whereas the reasoning model more often reached real APIs but failed on call or signature
compatibility.
11

Haque, Dasgupta, Rahman, and Rahman
TABLE 7 Compile-integration outcomes and first-shot compile-failure classes by condition (740 harnesses per
LLM condition). Columns𝒏and % give the total and share across the four LLM conditions.
LLM conditions LLM (all four)
codestral
codestral
(no ctx) gpt-oss
gpt-oss
(no ctx)𝑛% baseline
Compile-integration outcome
Compiled, first-shot 46 3 473 179 701 24 740
Compiled, after repair 95 12 740 728 1,575 53 740
Linked & fuzzed 38 10 289 315 652 22 —
First-shot compile-failure class
Missing include 441 536 62 397 1,436 64 0
Source file not found 134 120 21 106 381 17 0
API mismatch 64 53 65 43 225 10 0
Signature mismatch 37 22 44 7 110 5 0
Syntax error 8 4 62 7 81 4 0
Other 10 2 13 1 26 1 0
Total first-shot failures 694 737 267 561 2,259 100 0
Model Choice, Repair, and Stub Convergence Analysis (RQ3)
Model choice strongly affected first-shot compileability. As shown in Table 7, the reasoning model compiled 473 of
740 harnesses with static context, whereas the code-specialized model compiled only 46 and 3 of 740 harnesses (6%
and under 1%) across its two conditions. Removing the source window and finding description reduced the reasoning
model’s rate from 63.9% to 24.2%, confirming the value of static context. Figure 6 shows that repair raised its object
compileabilityto100%inbothconditionsafterameanof1.2roundswithcontextand1.3without;thecode-specialized
model improved only marginally.
This gain largely reflected stub convergence. As illustrated in Figure 7, the reasoning model often replaced
unresolved dependencies with local stubs. Consequently, only 289 of 740 context-enabled harnesses and 315 of 740
no-context harnesses linked and reached the fuzzer; 451 and 413 nominally compilable harnesses, respectively, failed
to bind to Autoware symbols. The no-context condition linked more harnesses, 315 versus 289, because it produced
simpler self-contained stubs. Repair therefore shifted the bottleneck from compilation to linking, making object
compileability an unreliable proxy for valid analysis. The baseline reinforces this distinction: although every harness
compiled, none exercised target logic, yielding average libFuzzer feature coverage of 2 compared with approximately
190 for the linked reasoning-model harnesses.
Confirmation Analysis
The outcomes depend on whether a harness reached and exercised the real target. Figure 8 summarizes this attrition.
After repair, 615 LLM harnesses linked and fuzzed for the full budget without a crash: 24 and 10 from the code-
specialized model (with and without static context), and 271 and 310 from the reasoning model (with and without
context). Theserunsprovideonlyweakdisconfirmationbecausemostsurvivingharnessesexercisedlocalstubsrather
than the intended Autoware implementation. The remaining 2,308 condition–target pairs never reached the fuzzer.
Four cases illustrate the aggregate results as shown in Table 8. First, a P1 control-gate harness compiled and
fuzzed cleanly only after replacing real interfaces with no-op stubs and reimplementing the input structure, so it did
notexercisethereportedAutowarebranch. Second,thecode-specializedmodelrarelyproducedcompilableharnesses,
mainly because of invalid target paths, missing headers, and leaked Markdown syntax. Third, static context increased
the reasoning model’s first-shot compileability from 24.2% to 63.9%, indicating that it improves artifact construction.
Finally, a velocity-smoother crash occurred inside a model-reimplemented helper with no Autoware frame on the
stack. Together, these cases show that compilation or crashing provides evidence only when the harness demonstrably
executes the real target code.
Overall, the results show that the primary obstacle to LLM-assisted dynamic confirmation is not fuzz-input
generation but faithful integration with the target software. Static context improves first-shot artifact quality, and
compiler-guidedrepairimprovesnominalcompileability,butneitherreliablypreserveslinkagetotherealimplementa-
12

Haque, Dasgupta, Rahman, and Rahman
codestral codestral
(no ctx)
gpt-oss gpt-oss
(no ctx)
baseline
0
25
50
75
100Percent of targets
6
0
64
24
100
13
2
100 98 100
5 1
39 43
First-shot compile After repair Linked & fuzzed
FIGURE6 First-shotobjectcompileability,post-repairobjectcompileability,andthefractionofharnessesthat
linked and reached the fuzzer.
Observation
fatal error:
’autoware_..._interface.hpp’ file
not found
Thought
“The harness must not depend on the real
Autoware code base; instead it provides
lightweight stubs that mimic the public
interface used by the target function.”
Action
struct EmergencyInterface {
bool is_emergency()
{return false;} //stub
};
memcpy(&ctrl,data,n); //fuzz
feeds emits
recompile (≤3 rounds)
FIGURE 7 A compiler-guided repair iteration from a GPT-OSS harness. In response to a missing dependency,
the model removes the real dependency and introduces interface stubs. Repeated repair makes the harness
compile while moving it away from the intended Autoware implementation
tion. Forlarge,dependency-richautomated-drivingstackslikeAutoware,successfulobjectcompilationmusttherefore
be separated from successful linking, target reachability, and genuine dynamic confirmation. The ablation in which
staticcontextraisedthereasoningmodel’sfirst-shotcompileabilityfrom24.2%to63.9%,showingthatthestaticstage
improves artifact quality rather than merely selecting targets.
TABLE 8 Summary of the Four Case Studies
# Setting Outcome
1 Control command gate, emergency
arbitration (P1, control); gpt-oss
with static context
Compiled, linked, and fuzzed for the full budget with no crash, but only by stubbing the real
interfaces. A weak disconfirmation; compileability overstates how much real logic is exercised.
2 Code-specialized model, all 30 tar-
gets
Compiled0/30, dominatedbyincludingthetarget.cppandomittingROSheaders. Codespecial-
ization did not overcome cross-package build integration.
3 Static-context ablation (gpt-oss) Static context raised first-shot compileability from 13.3% to 56.7%. The static stage materially
improves artifact quality, not just target selection.
4 Lonecrash,velocitysmoother(gpt-
oss)
The crash was an uncheckedstd::vector::atin the harness’s own stub, not in Autoware. A
crash is meaningless unless the harness provably drives the real code.
13

Haque, Dasgupta, Rahman, and Rahman
DISCUSSION
The observed failures are systemic rather than target-specific. They arise at the boundary between a syntactically
plausible harness and the build graph of a large ROS 2 workspace, where successful integration depends on resolving
packagedependencies,generatedmessagetypes,includepaths,linktargets,andnode-constructionrequirements. This
difficulty reflects the scale of the subject system, including hundreds of packages, 786 interfaces, and a distributed
validation surface, rather than the characteristics of any single candidate.
The results consistently support this conclusion. The strongest first-shot condition compiled only 473 of
740 harnesses, and 1,817 of the 2,259 initial failures were caused by dependency-wiring errors. Compiler-guided
repair raised object compileability to 100% for the reasoning model, yet only 652 of 2,960 LLM-generated harnesses
ultimately linked and reached the fuzzer. Thus, compilation is not the principal assurance objective.
0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500 3000
LLM harnesses (of 2960; first-shot compiles: 701)
Generated
Object-compiles
(after repair)
Links & fuzzes
Confirmed weakness
2960
1575
652
0
FIGURE 8 Attrition of LLM-generated harnesses across the four conditions
The repair loop fails because it optimizes for satisfying the compiler rather than preserving the connection
to the real target. When faced with unresolved dependencies, the model often removes them and introduces local
stubs, producing self-contained artifacts that compile but no longer exercise Autoware. The bottleneck therefore
shifts from compilation to linking and target reachability rather than being removed. A repair process suitable for
softwareassurancewouldneedtooptimizeexplicitlyforintegrationwiththenativebuild. Thiswouldrequireresolving
the correct package dependencies and build targets, linking against real implementation objects, and verifying at
runtime that the intended Autoware functions appear on the executed path. These requirements extend beyond prompt
refinement and call for build-aware tooling that treats semantic target preservation as a first-class constraint.
The results also limit the immediate role of LLM-generated harnesses in autonomous driving continuous
integration. On current evidence, they are not yet reliable as an autonomous dynamic-assurance stage. They may
nevertheless be useful for producing initial harness drafts that a human engineer completes and validates.
CONCLUSIONS
ThisstudyevaluatedwhetherLLMscanautomatethedynamicconfirmationofsoftwareweaknessesinanAVsoftware
stack. The results support a qualified negative. The static analysis identifies a broad safety-relevant attack surface in
Autoware, comprising 1,375 decision rules, 2,274 validation checks, and 482 input-to-safety-output paths across 185
packages. However,thedynamicstageshowsthatthemainobstacleisnotfuzzing,butfaithfulintegrationwiththereal
build. Unaided model outputs rarely compile and link against a stack of this scale. Compiler-in-the-loop repair raises
object compileability to 100% for the stronger model, but largely through stub convergence. As a result, only 652 of
2,960 harnesses reach the fuzzer, and all 37 crashes occur in generated stub code rather than in Autoware.
The results are qualified by several limitations. The decision-rule classification and package-level flow
analysis are heuristic. As a result, their counts characterize the observed attack surface rather than provide a sound
over- or under-approximation. Only packages with available compile commands contribute to the compiler-precise
inventory. All experiments are conducted in software-in-the-loop; therefore, we make no claim about exploitability
on a physical vehicle. The realized fuzzing time was 60 of the configured 600 seconds per target. Because few
14

Haque, Dasgupta, Rahman, and Rahman
harnesses linked and reached execution, this difference does not affect the main finding. Compileability is defined
as successful object compilation rather than full linking. Many compiling harnesses also replace real interfaces with
local stubs. The reported compileability rates and disconfirmations are therefore optimistic upper bounds on useful
analysis. Under a full-link and real-target-execution criterion, the effective success rate approaches zero across all
conditions. The repair loop optimizes object compilation, uses a fixed budget of 3 rounds, and relies on the same
modelforgenerationandrepair. Alink-awarerepairprocessshouldperformbetter,althoughthepresentdesignclearly
exposes the stub-convergence failure mode. Autoware is public and may have appeared in model pretraining data,
which would favor the models. Even so, the observed success rates remain low. Because the study evaluates only
Autoware and two open-weight models, the reported rates should not be generalized directly. The broader hypothesis
is that build integration, rather than input generation, is the binding constraint in large robotics and automated-driving
codebases.
Future automation should therefore focus on dependency resolution, native linking, and verified execution
of the intended target rather than on prompt refinement or compile-only repair. The static characterization remains
valuableindependentlybyprioritizinghigh-impactsitesforhumanreview. Wereleasetheprompts,generatedartifacts,
static-analysis outputs, and execution logs to support reproduction and further study.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We used the generative AI tools ‘ChatGPT’ and ‘Claude’ to help rephrase parts of our own writing to improve clarity
and for editorial purposes.
AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS
Md. Wasiul Haque, Sagar Dasgupta:conceptualization, methodology, coding, data collection, data analysis, and
writing – original draft;Mizanur Rahman:conceptualization, methodology, writing – original draft, review and
editing, and funding acquisition;Md Rayhanur Rahman:conceptualization, methodology, writing – original draft,
review and editing.
DECLARATION OF CONFLICTING INTERESTS
The authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication of
this article.
FUNDING
This research was supported by the National Center for Transportation Cybersecurity and Resiliency (TraCR) (a
U.S. Department of Transportation National University Transportation Center) headquartered at Clemson University,
Clemson,SouthCarolina,USA(Award#69A3552344812,69A3552348317)andNationalScienceFoundation(NSF)
(Award # 2340456). Any opinions, findings, conclusions, and recommendations expressed in this material are those
of the author(s) and do not necessarily reflect the views of funding agencies, and the U.S. Government assumes no
liability for the contents or use thereof.
15

Haque, Dasgupta, Rahman, and Rahman
