record_id: arxiv:2506.19998
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2506.19998
fetched_title: Doc2Agent: Scalable Generation of Tool-Using Agents from API Documentation
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:21Z

arXiv:2506.19998v1 [cs.CL] 24 Jun 2025
Preprint. Under review.
Doc2Agent: Scalable Generation of Tool-Using Agents from
API Documentation
Xinyi Ni, Haonan Jian, Qiuyang Wang, Vedanshi Chetan Shah & Pengyu Hong
Michtom School of Computer Science
Brandeis University
Waltham, MA 02453, USA
{xinyini, hongpeng }@brandeis.edu
Abstract
REST APIs play important roles in enriching the action space of web agents,
yet most API-based agents rely on curated and uniform toolsets that do
not reflect the complexity of real-world APIs. Building tool-using agents
for arbitrary domains remains a major challenge, as it requires reading
unstructured API documentation, testing APIs and inferring correct param-
eters. We propose Doc2Agent, a scalable pipeline to build agents that can
call Python-based tools generated from API documentation. Doc2Agent
generates executable tools from API documentations and iteratively refines
them using a code agent. We evaluate our approach on real-world APIs,
WebArena APIs, and research APIs, producing validated tools. We achieved
a 55% relative performance improvement with 90% lower cost compared to
direct API calling on WebArena benchmark. A domain-specific agent built
for glycomaterial science further demonstrates the pipeline’s adaptability to
complex, knowledge-rich tasks. Doc2Agent offers a generalizable solution
for building tool agents from unstructured API documentation at scale.
1 Introduction
Tool agents (Ferrag et al. (2025), Yehudai et al. (2025), Wang et al. (2024a), Qu et al. (2025)),
built on LLMs, aim at interacting autonomously with existing software or web services.
One important tool source to enrich the capability of tool agents is from existing REST
API services (Barry, 2003). REST APIs are a widely adopted standard for communication
between clients and servers, which expose programmic access to web-based services through
structured endpoints. API agents (Qin et al. (2023), Du et al. (2024), Song et al. (2025b)) use
REST APIs by sending HTTP requests with appropriate parameters to access, manipulate,
or retrieve structured data from web services. The method to connect REST APIs to these
agents varies. For example, ToolLlama (Qin et al., 2023) created a scraper to fetch 16,000
APIs from RapidAPI which provides uniformed API specifications. API-based agent (Song
et al., 2025b), added API documentation as part of input prompt to the agent. On the other
hand, API-calling benchmarks such as WebArena (Zhou et al., 2024), Appworld (Trivedi
et al., 2024), ComplexFuncBench (Zhong et al., 2025) provides ready-to-use APIs in an
uniform format, usually a predefined JSON schema. While existing benchmarks and
agent frameworks typically offer APIs in clean, uniform formats to facilitate convenient
function calling, this setup overlooks the real-world challenges posed by inconsistent
and low-quality API documentation. The assumption that APIs can be seamlessly used
by AI agents does not hold in practice. Beyond well-maintained commercial platforms
such as RapidAPI and Postman, many APIs lack comprehensive documentation and often
do not follow standardized schemas. Even when schemas are available, they may be
incomplete or omit critical information, making it difficult to automate tool generation
reliably. Furthermore, API services and their documentation are frequently outdated,
requiring extensive validation and refinement to ensure usability. These challenges reveal a
significant gap between tool agents and real-world API services.
1

Preprint. Under review.
/getWeather GET
Request Body
{
“date”: “the date you want to
know about the weather”
“required”: True
}
Response Body
{
“weather”: [sunny, rainy, ...]
}
/getWeather GET
Request Body
{
“date”: “the date you want to
know about the weather”
“required”: True
}
Response Body
{
“weather”: [sunny, rainy, ...]
}
Use this to create a new game.
It will return you a session ID.
Create a new player to a
game.
To join the game
To do some action
/{session}/{player}/{action}
/{session}/{player}/join
/{session}/{player_name}
/create
Well-structured API
Specifications
Manual Tool Integration Effort
Incorrect or Incomplete API Usage
Unstructured API
Documentation
Unscalable Agent
Development
Automated Tool Generation
Self-Validation and Refinement
Scalable Agent
Deployment
Previous
Ours
📄
✅

❌
🚫
🛠
🔄
🤖
Figure 1: Bridging the Gap Between Real-World APIs and AI Agents (Top) Conventional
agent development relies on high-quality APIs and manual integration, leading to scalability
issues. (Bottom) Our approach automates tool generation from natural language API
documentation, enabling self-validation, refinement, and seamless deployment of AI agents.
We argue that it is essential to develop an automated pipeline for scalable agent generation
with AI-ready tools from any domain-specific REST APIs (Figure 1). Such a pipeline
enables rapid tool creation directly from natural language API documentation, enhancing
development efficiency for AI practitioners. For end users, API agents provide an intuitive
natural language interface to interact with APIs, lowering the barrier to entry. For the AI
agent community, this automation facilitates seamless integration of diverse APIs, expand-
ing agent capabilities and supporting the creation of tool-accessible benchmarks. In this
work, we focus on constructing Python-based tools that can be seamlessly generated and
executed by an action parser (Wang et al., 2024b). These tools are natively compatible with
popular agentic frameworks such as LangGraph, LlamaIndex, and AutoGen. Compared to
approaches that rely on direct API requests (Song et al., 2025b), encapsulating functionality
as Python functions improves token efficiency and allows code agents to concentrate on
task logic and parameter usage, rather than low-level API construction. Another important
application of agent-generation pipeline lies in the development of scientific agents (Wang
et al., 2024a). Agents are increasingly demonstrating their versatility across research do-
mains, including science (Baek et al. (2024); Chen et al. (2025)), healthcare (Abbasian et al.
(2024)), and finance (Li et al. (2023)). These agents are designed to tackle domain-specific
challenges—for example, ChemCrow (Bran et al., 2023), a chemistry-focused research agent,
uses expert-curated tools to perform tasks such as data retrieval, analysis, and prediction.
However, its tools were manually implemented by researchers. Many research services are
already accessible via REST APIs, including dataset repositories (Sayers et al. (2021), Rose
et al. (2021)) and scientific applications (Dorst & Widmalm (2023), Woods Group (2025)).
Our pipeline has the potential to automate tool generation for such APIs, accelerating the
deployment of domain-specific research agents.
Research APIs are often less actively maintained than commercial APIs due to limited
developer resources, resulting in lower documentation quality and inconsistent schema
design. Furthermore, research agents typically need to query across multiple datasets,
each using distinct entries, representations, and semantic conventions. These variations
pose significant challenges for using correct input parameter, especially in the absence of
domain-specific prior knowledge.
To address the limitations in tool agent development, we propose an open-source pipeline,
Doc2Agent1(Figure 3), which (1) Autonomous generation of Python-based tools from any
REST API documentation written in natural language, (2) Automatic evaluation of tool
1Code available at https://github.com/coolkillercat/Doc2Agent
2

Preprint. Under review.
functionality to verify operability and alignment with API descriptions, (3) Iterative tool
refinement to improve reliability and usability, infer parameter values without requiring
prior domain knowledge. (4) Deploy toolkits to MCP server for seamless deployment into
any agentic framework.
To demonstrate the effectiveness of our approach, we collected 167 real-world API docu-
mentation pages comprising 744 publicly accessible endpoints, 174 API documentations
for WebArena benchmark and 16 websites for glycoscience research (Taniguchi et al., 2015).
Differ from prior benchmark datasets, these API docs have diverse and inconsistent docu-
mentation formats (1, bottom) rather than uniform schemas such as OpenAPI specification.
Our results can be summarized as follows: (1) Doc2Agent generated verifiable tools for
59.5% of real-world APIs and 81.5% of research APIs, with refinement improving tool
pass rates by 47.6%; (2) compared to direct API calling (Song et al., 2025b), our tool-based
approach achieved a 55.1% performance boost at only 10% of the cost per task; (3) we built a
glycomaterial research agent using only auto-generated tools, demonstrating Doc2Agent’s
potential for scientific applications without domain-specific knowledge.
2 Doc2Agent Pipeline
q
Using Generated Tools Direct API calling
Make a request to the OSRM HTTP
Router API.
Parameters:
-----------
profile : str Mode of transportat...
service : str One of the following...
...
Examples:
---------
>>> # Get a route between ...
general_request(profile='5000', ...
Concise Function Reference Raw API Documentation
```endpoint
GET http://metis.lti.cs.cmu.edu:{profile}/{service}/v1/test/{coordinates}[.
{format}]?option=value&option=value
```
| Parameter | Description |
| --- | --- |
| `profile` | Mode of transportation. One of the following three values:
`5000` for car (driving), `5001` for bicycle (biking), and `5002` for foot
(walking). |
| `service` | One of the following values: [`route`](#route-service), [`nearest`]
(#nearest-service), [`table`](#table-service), [`match`](#match-service),
[`trip`](#trip-service), [`tile`](#tile-service) |
| `coordinates`| String of format `{longitude},{latitude};{longitude},{latitude}
[;{longitude},{latitude} ...]` or `polyline({polyline}) or polyline6({polyline6})`.
|
| `format`| `json` or `flatbuffers`. This parameter is optional and defaults to
`json`. |
......
```endpoint
GET http://metis.lti.cs.cmu.edu:{profile}/nearest/v1/test/{coordinates}...
```
(1116 lines)
Abstracted Function Call
general_request(profile='5000',
service='route',
coordinates='13.388860,52.517037;13.3970’)
Low-Level HTTP Call
request = requests.get(
f"http://metis.lti.cs.cmu.edu:5000/route/v1/t
est/"13.388860,52.517037;13.397634,52.5294
07;13.428555")
Figure 2: Comparison of function-based API
using and direct API calling
Existing API-calling approaches (Song et al.,
2025b) allow LLMs to read API documen-
tation and generate URLs to invoke REST
APIs directly. However, this method is
cumbersome: lengthy documentation con-
sumes context window space, wastes to-
kens, and can cause the model to lose focus
in multi-turn interactions (Liu et al., 2023;
Laban et al., 2025). To address these chal-
lenges, we provide agents with generated,
Python-based tools in place of raw REST
APIs, enabling more efficient and intuitive
function calls (Figure 2). Our workflow can
be divided into 4 main steps: tool genera-
tion, tool validation, tool improvement, and
agent deployment(Figure 3). We take a set
of API documentations in HTML/Markdown format as our input. Each API documenta-
tion has multiple endpoints. The output of our pipeline is an agent that can use all API
documentations as its tools automatically.
2.1 Tool Generation
In tool generation, we produce Python functions with customizable parameters designed
for seamless agent use. We adopt two strategies for generating agent-friendly tools:
Direct Tool Generation When API documentation is simple and well structured, we lever-
age LLMs’ structured information extraction capabilities (Dagdelen et al., 2024; GPTs, 2024)
to convert essential API details into standardized JSON format (Appendix F). These JSON
files are then transformed into Python functions that wrap the API calls, incorporating basic
input validation and default value autofill. This encapsulation simplifies API interaction,
reduces redundancy, and streamlines agent development.
Target-Oriented Tool Generation For complex or highly flexible APIs, such as general-
purpose search endpoints with multiple filters, direct wrapping may be ineffective, as
agents struggle to interpret input requirements from the context. In these cases, we guide
the generator to first produce simplified function “fingerprints,” which define a specific use
case along with expected inputs and outputs. The full function is then generated based on
the fingerprint. This strategy produces tools that are better aligned with downstream tasks
and more accessible to agents than raw API interfaces.
3

Preprint. Under review.
/create
/{session}/{player_name}
/{session}/{player}/join
/{session}/{player}/{action}
{
}
Unstructured Docs
(HTML)
Structured Specs
(JSON)
APILLAMA
Attempt to make
function calls
Tool Name Param
Name
Param
Value
create_game - -
create name Nick
join player ?
do action run
No
Example Code Agent
Example Input
Tool DB
Generate1
Use this to create a new game.
It will return you a session ID.
Create a new player to a
game. (e.g. /1/Nick/)
To join the game
To do some action
Validate2
Tools
(Code)
Status
404 ❌
200✔
Content
<error> ❌
<info> ✔
API Server
Refine3
Tool Agent
API Calling
Description
Tool(Example_Input)
join(player=Nick)
Fix Tools with bug or
incorrect parameter
create(name=Nick)
Relevant Tool Info
Bad
Response
create(name)
join(player)
do(action)
Tool DB
Encapsulate API Service
Deploy4
Export as MCP service
Can you create a
game for me?
Tool Agent
*Search in Tool DB*
Call create_game()
I’d like to join the
game, my name is Rice
Response:
Session ID: 100
*Search in Tool DB*
Call join(player=Rice)
Call create(name=Rice)
Response:
Success
Figure 3: Overview of Doc2Agent: Automated pipeline for generating AI agents from API
docs. The API docs in free-text are used to generate tools. The tools are validated and
refined. A tool agent equipped with the generated tools is deployed as an MCP service.
The test of generated APIs, especially in a real-life environment, may cause unexpected
circumstanses, like changing password and deleting items (Section 7). We allow users to
specify REST API methods allowed for tools to minimize the risk of automatic testing.
2.2 Tool Validation
The quality of API documentation significantly impacts the performance of API-based
agents. However, real-world API documentation is often incomplete or unreliable, making
automatic evaluation of generated tools essential.
REST APIs require valid input parameters to function, tools cannot be evaluated without
example values. Malformed inputs will fail even if the API itself is functional. When
documentation provides example parameters, we assume they produce valid responses
and use these tools for evaluation. For tools lacking examples, we infer parameter values
in a later stage. To validate a tool, we call it using the provided example inputs and
compare the actual API response against an expected output generated by a language
model, conditioned on the tool’s description. A tool is considered verified if the response
aligns with the model-predicted expectation. For tools derived from real-world APIs, our
validation results show strong agreement with human judgment. We further analyze failed
tools using status codes, response content, and runtime exceptions. Most failures stem from
incorrect or incomplete parameter values, motivating our method for automatic generation
of high-quality parameter inputs(Appendix C).
2.3 Tool Refinement
Parameter Value Inference For APIs lacking proper parameter values, large language
models often struggle to generate valid inputs. Our experiments (Section 4.3) confirm that
LLMs are unreliable at guessing parameter values. This aligns with recent findings (Song
et al., 2025a), which highlight the difficulty LLMs face in producing complete and accurate
API inputs. We construct an automatically generated parameter database to support pa-
rameter value inference. We leverage two primary sources of information: (1) parameter
examples from other API documentations, particularly from the same domain, and (2)
JSON responses from previously validated API tools, which contain rich domain-specific
key-value pairs. The latter captures implicit inter-API dependencies, where outputs of
one service often correspond to inputs of another—conceptually forming a service de-
4

Preprint. Under review.
pendency graph (Bushong et al. (2021); Lercher et al. (2024)). These dependencies allow
us to repurpose response data to infer plausible parameter values. The database is con-
structed without requiring external domain knowledge. All discovered parameter values
are stored in a vector database to enable efficient semantic similarity search (Han et al., 2023).
Tool ValidationTool1(cat_id=id1)
Tool1(cat_id=id1)
Tool2(cat_name=’’)
Tool2(cat_name=’’)
Tool2(cat_name=
’luna’)
Parameter
Key
Parameter
Description
Paremeter
Value
cat_id The ID of
cat id1
name --- luna
color --- org
... ... ...
cat_name --- luna
Similarity
Search
Key & Description
Embeddings
Tool Database
Generated Tools
Verified Tools
API Response from
verified tools
“id”: id1
“name”: luna
“color”: org
Failed Tools
Refined tools
Update
Query Embedding
(cat_name)
call API
{
}
Best Match:
name, ‘luna’
Figure 4: A parameter database is automatically con-
structed using validated tools, enabling parameter
value inference based on the semantic similarity of pa-
rameter/response keys.
Parameter examples are indexed
by both name and description.
When encountering an unknown
parameter γ, we embed its name
and description, retrieve seman-
tically similar entries from the
database, and rank them based on
tool and parameter similarity. We
then sample up to 10 candidate
values for downstream usage.
Tool FixingWe fix the tools that ei-
ther have no parameter values or
produced incorrect responses. For
each failed tool, we provide a code
agent with the corresponding API
documentation, error information,
and the original Python code. If
the failure stems from missing pa-
rameters, we additionally supply
the agent with candidate parameter values.
The agent generates a revised version of the tool, which is then re-evaluated through
the validation process. If the updated tool passes validation, we overwrite its code and
documentation. When a new parameter value is used, it is recorded as an example and
added to the parameter database. This refinement-validation loop is repeated for multiple
rounds to maximize tool recovery and quality.
2.4 Deployment
Once high-quality tools are obtained, they can be readily integrated into tool-using agents
such as CodeAct (Wang et al., 2024b). Since the tools are implemented in Python, they
remain compatible with a wide range of agent architectures, including those that support
advanced capabilities like planning (Stein et al., 2025), reasoning(Wei et al. (2023), Kojima
et al. (2023)), long-term memory (Du et al., 2025), and tool retrieval (Yehudai et al., 2025).
This synergy between agents and tools significantly enhances task-solving performance.
To support scalable and standardized integration, tools can be deployed via an MCP (Model-
Context-Protocol) server (Hou et al., 2025), which provides a unified protocol for accessing
tools, managing data, and orchestrating workflows. Tools can operate independently
through a host-side agent or be dynamically invoked by clients, enabling flexible and mod-
ular agent-tool interactions. We deploy the API services using FastAPI MCP (Abramov,
2025). As an alternative deployment path, tools can also be exported as OpenAPI specifi-
cations (Swagger, 2024), enabling seamless integration with both enterprise systems (e.g.,
GPTs) and open-source agent frameworks such as CrewAI, LangGraph, and AutoGen.
3 Experiment
3.1 Data Collection
Previous REST API-based benchmarks (Zhou et al. (2024), Trivedi et al. (2024), Zhong et al.
(2025)) typically assume ideal conditions by either providing agent-ready, Python-based
tools or clean, standardized API specifications. In contrast, our work emphasizesrobustness
and scalability in the face of real-world API documentation, which is often unstructured,
5

Preprint. Under review.
inconsistent, and heterogeneous in format and quality. To evaluate the effectiveness of our
pipeline under these realistic conditions, we curated data from three diverse sources.
Real-world API documentations We collect 167 API documentation pages from
APIList.com, comprising a total of 744 endpoints. Upon analysis, we find that only 24
of these documentations were of high quality. The majority were semi-structured and
difficult to interpret at first glance, often requiring careful manual inspection to infer correct
parameter values. Examples and selection criteria are provided in Appendix A.
WebArena (Zhou et al., 2024) WebArena is a reproducible web environment designed for
developing autonomous agents to perform complex web-based tasks. While originally
intended for web browsing agents, its environment also supports API interactions, with
API documentation quality varying across domains (Song et al., 2025b), which provides
a great environment for testing robust tool generation approach. We utilize the available
API documentation from five WebArena environments: GitLab, Open Street Map(Map),
One Stop Shop(Shopping-Customer), E-Commerce Content Management(Shopping-Admin,
CMS) and Cross site tasks(Multi). We exclude the Reddit task, because WebArena Reddit
sandbox doesn’t provide API documentations.
Glycoscience APIs To evaluate our pipeline’s ability to generate domain-specific research
agents, we target glycoscience (Taniguchi et al., 2015), with complex APIs and inconsis-
tent data standards. We collect REST API documentation from major databases, includ-
ing GlycoData (Wang et al., 2025a), GlyGen (York et al., 2020), GlyTouCan (Tiemeyer
et al., 2017), KEGG GLYCAN (Hashimoto et al., 2006), Glycosmos (Yamada et al., 2020),
Glyconnect (Alocci et al., 2018), The O-GlcNAc Database (Wulff-Fuentes et al., 2021),
GLYCAM (Woods Group, 2025), Protein API (Nightingale et al., 2017), PubChem (Kim
et al., 2016) and UniLectin (Imberty et al., 2021).. These APIs vary widely in quality and
structure, and present additional challenges such as inconsistent identifiers, non-standard
representations, and cross-database linking (Appendix D.2).
3.2 Implementation
Generator We use GPT-4o in structured mode for direct tool generation and
Claude 3.7 Sonnet for target-oriented generation. In the direct tool generation, one tool is
generated per extracted API. In the target-oriented generation, up to 10 task-specific tools
are generated per API documentation. For WebArena, we use direct tool generation for
Gitlab and Map docs; and task-oriented generation for Shopping and Admin docs.
Code Agent for Validation and Refinement We employ Claude 3.7 Sonnet as the code
agent for tool testing and refinement. It is capable of generating well-structured Python code
along with clear documentation, enabling seamless integration with downstream agents.
Tool Agent To evaluate the impact of high-quality, agent-usable tools, we conduct a compar-
ative study based on the design of API agents from Song et al. (2025b). Our implementation
builds upon CodeAct Wang et al. (2024b), powered by GPT-4o, with basic code execution
capabilities and minimal tool retrieval support. The key difference lies in tool usage: our
API agent utilizes refined, Python-based API tools, whereas prior approaches rely solely on
raw API documentation as input prompts. For more advanced applications, stronger tool
agents such as ReTool Feng et al. (2025) can be used to further enhance tool utilization.
4 Result
4.1 Generation of Python-based API Tools from Documentation
Our validator enables self-evaluation of the generated tools. An example of the generated
tool is provided in Appendix F. We allow up to three refinement rounds per tool. Results
are summarized in Table 1. Despite the complexity of real-world API documentation, we
successfully produce 443 validated tools. A frequent cause of failure is the REST API service
no longer operational. In the WebArena benchmark, Wiki and Map environments have rela-
tively simple API designs, and we apply direct tool generation. Some Map APIs fail due to
6

Preprint. Under review.
Real-life API WebArena Glycoscience API
Wiki Map Shopping-Admin(CMS) Shopping-Customer GitLab
Endpoints 744 26 53 555 108 988 131
Validated Tools 443 21 28 159 35 213 70
Table 1: Generated Agent-Ready Python-based Tools with Doc2Agent from Raw API Docs
Method Gitlab Shopping CMS Map Multi Avg.
Vanilla WebArena Evaluation
WebArena Baselineb(Zhou et al., 2024) 15.0 13.9 10.4 15.6 (8.3) (12.3)
StePb(Sodhi et al., 2024) 32.2 50.8 23.6 31.2 (10.4) (36.5)
SkillWeaverb(Zheng et al., 2025) 22.2 27.2 25.8 33.9 - (29.8)
API-based agentt(Song et al., 2025b) 43.9 25.1 20.3 45.4 (8.3) (29.2)
Hybrid agentbt(Song et al., 2025b) 44.4 25.7 41.2 45.9 (16.7) (38.9)
API-Specified Evaluation
Hybrid agentbt(Song et al., 2025b) 47.2 29.4 45.5 50.5 44.0 42.2
Doc2Agentt(Ours) 48.9 39.6 39.7 58.7 44.4 45.3
∆ vs Direct API Calling ↑11.4% ↑57.8% ↑95.6% ↑29.3% - ↑55.1%
Table 2: Comparison result of different Methods on WebArena. We exclude Reddit task due
to no API documentation. Numbers in parentheses include Reddit tasks. ∆ represents the
estimated relative improvement percentage. b Browser-based Agent t API-based Agent
authentication errors, which is not required in WebArena task. In contrast, Shopping-Admin,
Shopping-Customer and GitLab involve complex API usage with numerous endpoints. For
these, we use both direct tool generation and target-oriented tool generation to produce
more task-aligned, agent-friendly tools. For Glycoscience APIs, most tools pass validation
without refinement, as they primarily consist of information retrieval endpoints.
4.2 Tool agent performance on WebArena
To compare our tool-using agent with direct API-based agent (Song et al., 2025b), we keep
most components of the CodeAct agent unchanged, including tool retrieval, planning,
and memory. As shown in Table 2, our method outperforms direct API calling with a 55%
relative increase in average success rate. Notably, Doc2Agent achieves a 57.8% improvement
on the Shopping task and a 95.6% improvement on the CMS task, both of which provide
low-quality API documentation. These results highlight the effectiveness of a tool-based
approach over direct API calls, especially when documentation is incomplete or poorly
structured. Even for well-documented APIs like Map, performance improves by 29.3%
due to simplified parameter usage. The substantial overall performance gain enables our
pure tool-based agent to outperform the hybrid approach that combines direct API calls
with browser interactions. Meanwhile, repeated use of tools significantly reduces token
consumption. On average, our approach costs $0.12 per task, compared to $1.20 for direct
API calling and $1.50 for the hybrid approach.
In comparison, SteP (Sodhi et al., 2024) relies on manually defined policies and task-specific
prompts to guide agent actions. Our Doc2Agent outperforms SteP on all tasks except
Shopping, demonstrating the superior effectiveness of automatically generated tools. Skill-
Weaver (Zheng et al., 2025) synthesizes reusable skills as Python-based browser tools, which
are relatively inefficient compared to our generated API-based tools. Doc2Agent consistently
achieves higher performance across all tasks compared to SkillWeaver.
API-Specified Evaluation The original WebArena evaluator is tailored for browsing-based
agents, relying on string matching, URL matching, and site navigation. We observed several
false positives, such as cases where the agent failed to complete the task but included partial
or coincidental keywords. Additionally, evaluation criteria involving browser interactions
(e.g., editing web elements) are not applicable to API-only agents. To address these limita-
tions, we introduce two adjustments: (1) For tasks marked as successful by the WebArena
7

Preprint. Under review.
evaluator, we use an LLM to verify whether the task was genuinely completed or merely
matched keywords by chance. (2) We restructure site navigation and content-checking
evaluations into exact_match or must_include criteria, based on the agent’s final action log.
This enables direct assessment of agent outputs, retrieved content, or API JSON responses,
ensuring fair evaluation for API-based agents. We apply this API-specific evaluation to the
hybrid agent as well, observing consistent overall performance with minor improvements.
We were unable to re-evaluate the API-based agent from prior work due to the lack of
publicly available logs. The evaluation details are provided in Appendix E.
4.2.1 Discussion: What factors make good tools for agents?
+ Accurate Parameter Values Our pipeline is particularly effective in addressing incomplete
or vague API documentation. The code agent infers valid input parameter values by
interacting with the environment—an approach especially beneficial for APIs like Shopping-
Customer and GitLab, which return user-specific data not described in the documentation.
By first querying supportive endpoints (e.g., list_project), the agent gathers contextual
information to validate additional tools. We observed a strong negative correlation between
parameter complexity and success rate for HybridAgent on Map tasks, highlighting the
challenge of manually specifying complex inputs. In contrast, tools generated by Doc2Agent
tend to use parameters with higher semantic alignment and lower complexity. However,
validating parameters for stateful REST methods remains difficult (see Section 7) and
introduces safety concerns for automatic testing on public servers.
+ Function-usage Success Rate Function usage success rate has the highest correlation with
the task-level success rate. Doc2Agent calls functions consistently well(85%-97%) across all
sites, while HybridAgent excels in shopping and CMS(98%-99%) tasks.
- Complex Response JSON Our approach shows lower performance than the Hybrid agent
on CMS tasks, primarily due to the presence of long and unfiltered API responses. To
manage context limitations, we truncated the response content, which may cause informa-
tion loss. This highlights the need for more sophisticated response processing. Integrating
advanced JSON navigation or summarization techniques could significantly improve the
effectiveness of API-based agents in such settings. Moreover, developing tools for response-
side information filtering presents a promising direction for enhancing tool efficiency.
4.3 Generation and Deployment of Research Agent
Unlike many real-world APIs, research-domain APIs often involve complex database identi-
fiers and representations (see Appendix D3), along with relatively limited domain knowl-
edge in base model. In this experiment, we explore the applicability of Doc2Agent in a
challenging scientific setting, where we apply Doc2Agent to glycoscience APIs and auto-
matically constructed a tool-using research agent specialized for the glycan domain.
Tool-generation Using Doc2Agent, we generate 70 refined tools and automatically con-
structed a database of parameter name–value pairs through parameter value inference. We
compare two methods for parameter value acquisition: an API response–based inference
approach and GPT-generated parameter candidates. Our results show that the API-based
inference approach doubles the tool pass rate (see Appendix D.2).
Settings To enable seamless access to the research agent, we host the tools on an MCP server
using FastMCP (Abramov, 2025). We evaluate three settings: (1) As used in Section 4.2, we
apply CodeAct which loads tools directly into functions (2) An entirely open-source setup
using Qwen-Agent (QwenLM, 2025) as the agentic framework, which supports basic MCP tool
orchestration, with Qwen3-32B (Yang et al., 2025) as the base model. (3) A deployment using
the enterprise-level application Claude Desktop, which offers advanced MCP Connector
integration with Claude Sonnet 4 as the base model.
Task Generation We prompted GPT-4o to generate 50 research-oriented tasks based on the
tool descriptions, including 30 single-tool tasks and 20 multi-tool tasks. Due to the lack
of a formal evaluation framework, we used an LLM-as-a-judge approach (see template in
Appendix H.3) to estimate task success. Since not all generated tasks are guaranteed to be
8

Preprint. Under review.
solvable, we report success rates over the Filtered set using the union of all tasks successfully
completed by at least one agent to provide a fair basis for relative performance comparison.
Results Table 4.3 presents our results. Among the tested agents, Claude achieved the highest
average success rate of 36%, successfully solving 58.1% of the do-able tasks. Claude excelled
in multi-tool tasks, leveraging its advanced MCP orchestration technique. CodeAct’s
success rate is comparable to its performance on WebArena tasks, suggesting that our
function generation method is not constrained by domain-specific characteristics and has
the potential to scale effectively to other research domains. Notably, Qwen3-32B, despite
being a smaller base model, performed on par with CodeAct, underscoring the potential of
open-source research-tool agents.
Setting Total Filtered Tool Use Task Type
Single Multi Analysis Data Retrieval Transformation
Claude Desktop(Claude-Sonnet-4) 36.0 58.1 36.7 35.0 45.5 30.4 20.0
CodeAct(GPT-4o) 32.0 51.6 46.7 10.0 40.9 30.4 0.0
QwenAgent(Qwen3-32B) 30.0 48.3 33.3 25.0 31.8 26.1 40.0
Table 3: Success rate over different agent frameworks. Filtered refers to evaluation on the
combined set of tasks successfully completed by at least one framework.
5 Related Works
Tool(API) Agent LLM-based tool agents are able to reason through user queries, select and
apply appropriate actions, and return the results of the chosen action. For example, Bran
et al. (2023) developed ChemCrow by integrating GPT-4 and 18 tools designed by experts.
Qin et al. (2023) collected 16k public REST APIs from the RapidAPI platform RapidAPI
(2024), and trained a tool retriever that can choose the most appropriate API in response
to a user query. Wang et al. (2025b) represented tools as a unique token that are integrated
into LLM generation. Zhang et al. (2025) compared API agents and GUI agents in solving
web tasks. Song et al. (2025b) built a hybrid agent that can browse and call APIs to perform
online tasks. Model Context ProtocolHou et al. (2025) allows fast deployment of argentic
services. BenchmarksYehudai et al. (2025) are developed to evaluate the effectiveness of
agents, while most of current benchmarks assume access to well-prepared toolsets(Trivedi
et al. (2024), Qin et al. (2023), Song et al. (2023)). Particularly, we use WebArenaZhou et al.
(2024) to demonstrate the improvement by encapsulated API-based tools.
Agent Generation and Improvement The creation for AI agents requires prompt design
and tool design, which will be challenging to be automated. Chen et al. (2024) proposed a
framework that generates specialized agents to form an AI team tailored to specific tasks.
Shi et al. (2025) proposed AutoTools, which explores function generation through docs, but
relies on standardized API specifications from RapidAPI. Zheng et al. (2025) introduced
Skillweaver, a framework that enables web agents to self-improve by practicing reusable
skills into APIs. However, their test revealed synthesized skills are worse than human APIs.
Another direction(Guti´errez et al. (2025), Du et al. (2025)) focus on memory updating that
allows agents to improve through past experience.
6 Conclusion
In this work, we present Doc2Agent, a scalable pipeline for generating AI agents equipped
with validated, Python-based tools from natural language REST API documentation.
Doc2Agent not only converts unstructured documentation into executable tools but also
detects and refines inaccuracies through automated validation. We applied our pipeline to
three sources: real-world APIs, WebArena environments, and glycomaterial research APIs.
We successfully generated and validated a large set of agent-ready tools. In WebArena,
agents using our tools achieved a 55% relative performance improvement while reducing
per-task cost to just 10% of the original. We further demonstrated Doc2Agent’s domain
9

Preprint. Under review.
adaptability by building a research agent for glycomaterial science, leveraging our parame-
ter inference method to resolve diverse data representations without external expert input.
Doc2Agent enables efficient and robust agent creation across domains, bridging the gap
between unstructured API documentation and practical tool-based agent deployment.
7 Limitation
API Documentation Acquisition Our method relies on available API documentation (e.g.,
web pages, OAS files) to generate Python-based tools, and thus cannot be applied to APIs
lacking documentation. Currently, some human effort is still required to collect the initial
API documentation. A promising future direction is to integrate our approach with web
browsing capabilities, enabling agents to automatically discover and scrape relevant API
documentation based on a given task—thereby expanding the agent’s toolset autonomously.
Validation for Stateful APIsOur current validation approach relies on analyzing individual
API responses, which is effective for stateless APIs but insufficient for stateful ones. Validat-
ing stateful APIs often requires more complex workflows involving multiple, coordinated
API calls and additional endpoints to query server-side status or track changes over time.
API dependency We infer values for unknown parameters using example inputs and
JSON responses from validated API calls. This approach leverages implicit dependencies
between APIs and performs well when such relationships exist. However, its effectiveness
diminishes for unrelated APIs, where parameter values cannot be reliably inferred from
prior tool outputs.
Evaluation Evaluating our pipeline poses unique challenges. Existing function-calling
benchmarks (e.g., ToolBench (Qin et al., 2023), AppWorld (Trivedi et al., 2024), Complex-
FuncBench (Zhong et al., 2025)) focus primarily on tool usage, assuming well-prepared APIs
and thus bypassing the need for tool generation. In contrast, browsing-based benchmarks
(e.g., WebArena (Zhou et al., 2024), WebVoyager (He et al., 2024), ST-WebAgentBench (Levy
et al., 2024)) introduce biases when used to evaluate our method: not all tasks in these
environments are solvable via API calls, while others are directly derived from API usage.
Consequently, comparisons between API agents and browsing agents on these benchmarks
may be skewed due to task distribution. This highlights the need for a benchmark specifi-
cally designed to evaluate open-domain API usage, where tool generation, validation, and
application can be fairly assessed across diverse and realistic API scenarios.
Cheating in Code Agent We observed that the code agent occasionally attempted to ”cheat”
during tool refinement. For example, by generating try-catch blocks to suppress exceptions
and bypass validation errors. To mitigate this issue, we introduced an uneditable testing
code section to enforce strict validation. However, this behavior highlights a broader
concern: the agent’s optimization strategy may not always align with human intent or
practical utility.
8 Ethical Consideration
Autonomous REST API agents may trigger unintended or harmful actions, especially when
interacting with external servicesMudryi et al. (2025). The tools generated by our pipeline are
not manually reviewed for safety and, if misused, could result in undesirable or potentially
malicious behavior. Given the ongoing development of AI safety practices, we recommend
restricting tool generation to GET methods only, which are generally read-only and pose
lower risk. This precaution helps mitigate unintended side effects during agent execution.
