record_id: arxiv:2606.28841
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.28841
fetched_title: LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:05Z

LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with
MCP and Proof Repair
Santhana Srinivasan R1 and Maithilee Patawar1
Indian Institute of Information Technology, Design and Manufacturing,
Kancheepuram
Abstract.Large language models are increasingly capable of mathe-
matical reasoning, but the proofs they generate are often unreliable and
hard to verify. Interactive theorem provers such as Lean 4 address this
by accepting only kernel-checked proofs; however, their reach is bounded
by the formalized knowledge available. While Mathlib, a repository of
formalized Lean 4 theorems that covers diverse mathematical areas, cer-
tain specialized areas remain underrepresented; notably, the domain of
Combinatorics on Words (CoW). CoW studies sequences, exploring their
properties such as periodicity, borders, conjugacy, and morphisms. As a
result, specialized provers, trained on Mathlib-centered data, lack the
lemmas to operate in CoW. We present two contributions. First, we in-
troduce a Lean 4 formalization of CoW containing eight modules and
93declarations of core definitions and foundational lemmas. Second, we
present LAMP, a multi-agent framework that synthesizes kernel-verified
Lean 4 proofs by providing explicit, structured domain knowledge at in-
ference time through an ontology, rather than by fine-tuning a prover.
LAMP coordinates a Planner, Builder, and Verifier with Model Context
Protocol based access to a domain-specific CoW ontology. In a suite of
90CoW theorems that span all eight modules and three difficulty levels,
LAMP synthesizes verified proofs for96.7%of theorems, substantially
exceeding both an unscaffolded baseline and existing specialized provers.
An ablation shows that removing LAMP’s tool-grounded architecture or
its Planner/Builder separation each cost roughly 12 percentage points,
even with the backbone model held fixed.
Keywords:Theorem Proving·Lean 4·LLM Agents·Combinatorics
on Words·Model Context Protocol·Proof Automation
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have made rapid progress in mathematical rea-
soning, but the solutions they produce are often difficult to verify and unreliable
[30,22,44]. Interactive theorem provers such as Lean 4 [25] offer a reliable so-
lution to the problem. With Lean 4, every proof is checked by a small trusted
kernel, and the kernel-verified proof is correct regardless of how it was gener-
ated. This makes the pairing of LLM-based reasoning with formal verification
arXiv:2606.28841v1 [cs.LO] 27 Jun 2026

2 Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar
a promising route to scaling the formalization of mathematics, which is a task
that has traditionally demanded enormous expert effort [18].
The usefulness of this approach depends on the availability of formalized do-
main knowledge. The Lean 4 ecosystem is built on Mathlib [39], a large library
of formalized mathematics. It covers domains like analysis, number theory, lin-
ear algebra, and formal verification. However, its coverage is far from complete,
and several domains are unrepresented. One such domain isCombinatorics on
Words(CoW) [23], the study of structural properties of finite and infinite se-
quences. These properties include periodicity, borders, conjugacy, morphisms,
and primitive roots, which have no formalization in Mathlib. This gap is impor-
tant because proofs in CoW are often long and involve many cases. Such proofs
benefit from machine checking, but without a formal library, both human for-
malizers and automated provers lack the basic definitions needed to build these
proofs.
Existing automated provers do not close this gap. State-of-the-art (SOTA)
systems, whether fine-tuned for Lean (DeepSeek-Prover-V2 [30], Goedel-Prover
[22], Kimina-Prover [42]) are trained on a fixed, Mathlib-centered distribution.
Their performance is known to decline on tasks formalized in unfamiliar frame-
works [36]. For a domain absent from Mathlib, such as CoW, this degradation
is acute. These systems lack both the vocabulary and the supporting lemmas
needed to reason about CoW concepts. Therefore, the main limitation is not
the inherent difficulty of the reasoning task, but the ability of these systems to
generalize to new domains.
Our main observation is that an unformalized domain needs explicit and
structured domain knowledge at inference time, rather than knowledge that is
only learned implicitly through training. This knowledge includes the defini-
tions of the domain and the relationships between them. It can be provided to
a general-purpose model through external tools. In this way, the model can be
adapted to a new domain by organizing and providing the required knowledge
instead of retraining the model. We apply this idea specifically to CoW. Fig-
ure 1 illustrates this concretely: a CoW theorem with asorryplaceholder is
transformed into a kernel-verified proof by a general-purpose model drawing on
a curated CoW knowledge source.
We make this idea concrete through two artifacts: a Lean 4 formalization
of CoW andLAMP, a multi-agent framework for generating verified Lean 4
proofs. LAMP uses curated domain knowledge during the proving process via
Model Context Protocol (MCP) [1]. It combines three main agents: a Planner,
which creates a proof strategy; a Builder, which turns the strategy into Lean
tactics; and a Verifier, which checks the proof against the Lean kernel. Most im-
portantly, these agents can access a domain-specific CoW ontology that provides
the required definitions and their dependencies when needed. We summarize our
contributions as follows:
1. The first Lean 4 formalization of CoW. It contains eight modules (Word,
Factor, ProperPrefix, ProperSuffix, Border, Conjugacy, Period, Morphism)
with core definitions and foundational lemmas.

LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair 3
theorem border_period
(h : IsBorder b w) :
HasPeriod w (..) := by
sorry
LAMP
theorem border_period
...:= by
intro i hi; simp ...
omega verified
CoW ontology & MCP tools
Input Output
Fig.1: LAMP transforms a theorem withsorryinto a kernel-verified proof
2. LAMP, a multi-agent framework that injects domain knowledge into LLM
proof synthesis via MCP tools. It includes a structured CoW ontology that
is used by a dedicated Planner agent. This allows the framework to adapt
to the CoW domain without retraining the underlying model.
3. A CoW Evaluation Suite of90theorems across the eight modules and three
difficulty levels, including the classical border-period duality theorem, de-
signed as a growing foundation: solved theorems can be folded back into the
library to support harder results, rather than serving as a static benchmark.
On this suite, LAMP synthesizes verified proofs for96.7% of theorems, sub-
stantially exceeding both an unscaffolded LLM baseline (58.9%) and existing
specialized provers (1.1–8.9%), which fail almost entirely because CoW lies
outside their training distribution. The ablation above shows that this perfor-
mance depends on LAMP’s tool-grounded architecture and its Planner/Builder
separation, not on the backbone model alone. We also report performance on
an out-of-domain benchmark, where LAMP is deliberately less competitive: it
trades breadth across general mathematics for depth in an unformalized domain,
and we make this trade-off explicit rather than claiming general superiority.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows. Section 2 reviews related work in
theorem proving and agentic systems. Section 3 introduces the Lean 4 formaliza-
tion of CoW (Section 3.1) and then describes the LAMP system, its components,
and control algorithm. Section 4 reports the evaluation, ablations, and compar-
isons. Section 5 opens with a failure analysis and then discusses implications,
limitations, and future work, and Section 6 concludes.
2 Background and Related Work
Three lines of work are directly related to our setting. We first review the proof
assistantoursystemtargetsandthelibrarythatanchorsit(Section2.1).Wethen
survey approaches that leverage large language models for Lean proof genera-
tion (Section 2.2), and finally agentic frameworks that augment general-purpose

4 Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar
models with external tools to the same end (Section 2.3). A comprehensive re-
cent survey by [19] provides broader context; here we focus on the aspects most
salient to the design and evaluation of LAMP.
2.1 Lean 4, Mathlib, and Combinatorics on W ords
Lean 4 is an interactive theorem prover (ITP) and dependently typed func-
tional programming language in which mathematical statements are encoded as
types and proofs as terms whose well-typedness is checked by a small trusted
kernel [25]. Proofs are usually developed interactively throughtactics, which
transform a proof state consisting of hypotheses and goals until the goal is dis-
charged. This design makes Lean 4 an attractive target for machine-generated
proofs: any candidate proof, however it is produced, is accepted only if it passes
kernel checking, so correctness does not depend on trusting the generator. Other
widely used proof assistants include Coq [38] and Isabelle/HOL [26], though the
overwhelming majority of recent LLM-based prover research targets Lean 4.
Lean’s utility relies heavily on Mathlib [39], a community-driven library pro-
viding an extensive network of definitions, lemmas, and automation across di-
verse mathematical fields, including algebra, analysis, topology, number theory,
and combinatorics. Mathlib is also a fast-moving target: definitions are rou-
tinely added, renamed, or deprecated, and proof developments must track these
changes. Despite its breadth, Mathlib’s coverage is uneven, and several mathe-
matical domains remain entirely unformalized.
Combinatorics on Words(CoW) [23,24] is one such domain. CoW studies the
structural and combinatorial properties of finite and infinite sequences, encom-
passing periodicity, borders, conjugacy, primitive roots, and morphisms. CoW
hosts several long-standing open problems that have driven sustained research
activity. A central question, posed by Fraenkel and Simpson [10], asks how many
distinct squares a word of lengthncan contain; the conjectured upper bound ofn
remains open, with the best known bound of fewer than1.5ndistinct squares
established by Thierry [40]. The closely relatedruns conjecture, which posits
that the number of maximal repetitions in a word of lengthnis at mostn,
was formulated by Crochemore et al. [6] and subsequently resolved. Recent ad-
vances continue to sharpen density bounds for specific repetition patterns [27].
A recurring feature of proofs in this area is that they involve elaborate case
analyses over word combinatorics, making them both lengthy and error-prone to
verify by hand; this characteristic creates a natural demand for machine-checked
formalization.
The most substantial formalization of CoW to date is the project of Holub
and Starosta in Isabelle/HOL, which formalizes the Periodicity Lemma, the
Lyndon–Schützenberger equation, the Graph Lemma, and additional results on
Lyndon words and morphic languages [12,13,35]. No comparable Lean 4 for-
malization exists, which means that both researchers and automated provers
must build the necessary definitions and supporting lemmas from scratch. The
proposed work addresses this gap by establishing a CoW library in Lean 4.

LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair 5
2.2 LLM-based Theorem Provers
The application of neural language models to theorem proving originates with
GPT-f [29], which demonstrated that a transformer fine-tuned on proof data
can generate single proof steps in Metamath, guided by best-first search. Sub-
sequent work scaled this paradigm: PACT [11] introduced proof artifact co-
training, while curriculum learning over statement difficulty further improved
success rates on formal mathematics [28]. HyperTree Proof Search (HTPS) [17]
brought AlphaZero-style online training to theorem proving, achieving strong
results on both Metamath and the Lean-based miniF2F benchmark.
More recently, several systems have fine-tuned large language models specifi-
cally for whole-proof or stepwise proof generation in Lean. The DeepSeek-Prover
series [47,48,30] couples whole-proof generation with subgoal decomposition and
reinforcement learning, with its largest model reaching SOTA results on compe-
tition benchmarks. Kimina-Prover [42] adopts a reasoning-driven reinforcement-
learning framework. In contrast, the Goedel-Prover line [21,22] achieves compa-
rable performance with substantially smaller models by pairing scaffolded data
synthesis with verifier-guided self-correction. InternLM2.5-StepProver [46] scales
expert iteration on the Lean Workbook dataset [51] using a learned critic model
to guide search toward tractable subproblems. LEGO-Prover [43] constructs
reusable lemma libraries during proof search,and Baldur [9] demonstrates whole-
proof generation with repair in Isabelle. Draft, Sketch, and Prove [16] bridges in-
formal and formal reasoning by using an LLM to produce natural-language proof
sketches that are then translated into formal tactic sequences. AlphaProof [15],
combining reinforcement learning with autoformalization and Lean 4 verifica-
tion, achieved silver-medal performance at the 2024 International Mathematical
Olympiad, marking a landmark for AI-driven formal mathematics.
ThesesystemsaretypicallyevaluatedonminiF2F[53]andPutnamBench[41],
both of which are derived from mathematics competitions. ProofNet [3] extends
evaluation to undergraduate-level mathematics, and FormalMATH [52] provides
a broader benchmark across multiple mathematical domains.
A complementary family augments LLMs with retrieval. LeanDojo and its
ReProver model [49] extract training data from Lean repositories and perform
premise selection over Mathlib, retrieving relevant lemmas to condition proof
generation. Lean Copilot [34] integrates LLM-based tactic suggestion directly
into the interactive Lean workflow. Autoformalization, the automatic translation
from natural language mathematics to formal specifications, has also emerged
as a closely related direction, with large language models showing promising
capabilities for this task [45].
Despite strong benchmark numbers, these approaches share limitations that
are salient for our setting. Because they are trained predominantly on competi-
tion mathematics and on fixed snapshots of Mathlib, their ability to generalize
to domains outside their training distribution is unclear, and they can be brittle
to Mathlib version changes such as renamed or deprecated lemmas [5]. Recent
benchmarks specifically probe this concern: TaoBench [36] asks whether auto-
mated prover LLMs generalize beyond Mathlib, miniCTX [14] evaluates provers

6 Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar
on novel projects with long contexts, and related work observes that the effec-
tiveness of specialized provers diminishes on tasks involving unfamiliar problem
domains [33]. Finally, the largest specialized provers require substantial com-
putational resources to deploy. These observations motivate approaches that
introduce domain knowledge without retraining a monolithic model, which is
the direction our work pursues.
2.3 Agentic F rameworks for Theorem Proving
An alternative paradigm equips general-purpose LLMs with external tools and
coordinates them through agentic orchestration, rather than fine-tuning a ded-
icated prover. This builds on broader work in tool-augmented language mod-
els [50,31]. In the theorem-proving setting, the LLM supplies reasoning and Lean
expertise, while tools provide access to the proof state, lemma search, error di-
agnostics, and verification. Several systems explore agent decompositions of the
proving task, including multi-agent long-chain-of-thought reasoning [44], agent-
based proof refinement [4], interleaving of informal reasoning steps with tactic
generation [20], and language-agent approaches that couple reasoning with envi-
ronment interaction [37]. MCP [1] has recently emerged as a standard interface
for connecting LLMs to such tools, including Lean language-server tooling [7].
LAMP shares its agentic, MCP-based philosophy with Ax-Prover [5], which
also pairs a frontier LLM with Lean tooling and argues that tool-augmented
agents generalize where specialized provers do not; we view our work as com-
plementary rather than competing, and differ in three respects we make explicit
and evaluate. First, Ax-Prover demonstrates breadth across mathematics and
quantum physics using generic Lean tooling. In contrast, LAMP targets CoW,
a domain absent from both Mathlib and prior agentic benchmarks. To address
this, LAMP contributes a dedicated CoW Lean 4 library as a reusable dataset.
No generic Lean tool can supply this knowledge, as it does not yet exist outside
our work. Second, whereas existing agentic provers rely on generic Lean tooling,
LAMP introduces a structured, domain-specific CoWontologythat is exposed
as an MCP tool to Builder agent and also consumed by a dedicated Planner
agent during proof-strategy formation, injecting curated domain knowledge into
planning rather than leaving it implicit in the model’s weights. Third, LAMP
separates the planning of a proof strategy from the construction of Lean tactics
into distinct Planner and Builder agents, coordinated by a dual-loop orchestra-
tor. In Section 4, we show that both LAMP’s tool-grounded architecture and its
Planner/Builder separation are necessary for its performance on this unformal-
ized domain. Removing either component produces a marked drop in the proof-
synthesis rate. This isolates a unique contribution that generic tool-augmented
agents do not provide.

LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair 7
Table 1: Declaration breakdown of the CoW Lean 4 library by module.
Module Definitions Lemmas Total
Word 4 18 22
Factor 4 18 22
ProperPrefix 1 4 5
ProperSuffix 1 4 5
Border 3 4 7
Conjugacy 1 3 4
Period 3 6 9
Morphism 5 14 19
T otal 22 71 93
3 The LAMP System
3.1 The CoW Library
The library models words as lists over an arbitrary type (abbrev Word (α:
Type*) := Listα) and is organized into eight modules with a strict depen-
dency hierarchy:Word→Factor→{ProperPrefix,ProperSuffix}→Border,
withConjugacy,Period, andMorphismeach built directly atopWordandFac-
tor; later modules import only earlier ones.Wordestablishes the monoid struc-
ture under concatenation.Factorformalizes prefix, suffix, and factor relations
with full transitivity chains;ProperPrefixandProperSuffixcapture strict sub-
word relations and length inequalities.Borderencodes words that simultane-
ously appear as a proper prefix and suffix, illustrated below: a border is defined
directly in terms of the two prior modules, and its core closure lemma follows
by chaining a single prefix-to-factor lemma fromFactor. The following Lean 4
snippet illustrates theBorderdefinition and its entailment of the factor relation:
1def IsBorder ( b w : Wordα) : Prop :=
2I s P r o p e r P r e f i x b w∧I s P r o p e r S u f f i x b w
3
4theorem IsBorder . isFactor ( h : IsBorder b w ) : IsFactor b w
:=
5IsFactor . o f_ pr ef ix h .1. isPrefix
Conjugacycharacterizes cyclic rotations.Perioddefines periodicity, mini-
mal periods, and primitivity.Morphismcovers word morphisms together with
non-erasing, coding, and uniform classifications. Table 1 gives the declaration
breakdown per module; additional implementation details and design rationale
are given in Appendix A.
3.2 System Overview
LAMP is a multi-agent framework that synthesizes a complete, kernel-verified
Lean 4 proof from a theorem statement whose proof body is left as asorry

8 Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar
Fig.2: LAMP architecture and data flow
placeholder. Its design follows a single principle: rather than asking one language
model to perform mathematical reasoning, Lean coding, and error recovery si-
multaneously, LAMP decomposes the task across specialized agents and grounds
each of them in external tools so that decisions are based on verified facts rather
than the model’s recollection. Three core agents cooperate in this architecture. A
Plannerdevises a mathematical proof strategy, aBuilderrealizes that strategy
as Lean 4 tactics, and aVerifierchecks candidate proofs against the Lean ker-
nel. Managing this workflow is a centralOrchestrator, while aSemantic Toolbox
exposes a set of MCP [1] tools that the agents may query on demand. These
tools include a domain-specific CoW ontology. The system operates as a closed
feedback loop: a strategy is planned, built into code, and verified; if verification
fails, the structured error is returned to the agents, which revise and retry. This
loop runs under a bounded attempt budget until a proof is verified or the budget
is exhausted. Figure 2 shows the overall data flow. The remainder of this section
describes each component (Section 3.3) and then specifies the control algorithm
that ties them together (see Section 3.4).
3.3 Components
We describe the five components in data-flow order: the Orchestrator that con-
trols the loop, the Planner and Builder agents that produce strategy and code,
the Semantic Toolbox that grounds the Builder, and the Verifier that adjudi-
cates correctness. All agent reasoning is performed by a single general-purpose

LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair 9
large language model accessed through an API; LAMP is model-agnostic, and
we report results across several backbones in Section 4.
Orchestrator:The Orchestrator is the central controller that drives the “Planner
→Builder→Verifier" cycle and owns all loop state. Before any reasoning be-
gins, it performscontextual grounding: it extracts theimportstatements from
the target theorem, resolves each to the corresponding CoW source file, and
injects the verbatim library source into both agents’ prompts. This ensures the
agentsreasonaboutthelibrary’sactualdefinitionsandlemmanamesratherthan
plausible-looking inventions, which is the principal defense against hallucinated
identifiers. The Orchestrator also localizes edits: a theorem locator identifies the
exact source region occupied by the target proof so that generated tactics replace
only thesorrybody and never overwrite imports or neighbouring declarations,
with a conservative fallback that patches only the lines containingsorrywhen
boundariescannotbedetermined.Finally,theOrchestratorenforcesthebounded
attempt budget and the branching recovery policy formalized in Section 3.4, and
persists every verified proof to disk.
Planner Agent:The Planner is the mathematical strategist and does not emit
Leancode.Giventhegoalandtheinjectedlibrarycontext,itproducesanexplicit
chain-of-thought analysis followed by a structuredplanthat names the specific
library lemmas and the proof technique to apply (for example, chaining prefix
relations through a transitivity lemma before applying a factor lemma). The
Planner retains a persistent conversation history across re-planning iterations, so
that when a strategy fails it revises in light of the Builder’s accumulated feedback
rather than planning from scratch. Separating strategy from implementation in
this way lets the system distinguish a flawed mathematical approach (which
warrants re-planning) from a correct approach that was implemented incorrectly
(which warrants only a rebuild).
Builder Agent:The Builder is the tactical executor that translates the Planner’s
strategy into syntactically valid Lean 4 tactics. During generation, it queries
the Semantic Toolbox (up to a fixed limit per attempt) to retrieve definitions,
search for lemmas, or inspect the live goal state before synthesizing the final
proof. Within a single planning iteration the Builder maintains its own history:
if an attempt fails verification, the next attempt receives the structured error
and the prior code, enabling targeted self-correction without re-prompting from
scratch. A post-processing step strips any accidental re-emission of the theorem
signature so that only the proof body is patched into the source.
Semantic Toolbox:The Semantic Toolbox is the tool registry that exposes the
MCP ecosystem [1] to the Builder and routes each call to the appropriate back-
end. It provides three classes of tool. ALean LSPtool wraps the Lean language
server [7] to extract the precise goal state at the location of asorry. This state
consists of the hypotheses and target exactly as the kernel sees them. Conse-
quently, it provides the Builder with ground truth rather than an inferred proof

10 Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar
state.AMathlib searchtool, built on LeanExplore [2], queries the surrounding
Lean ecosystem for general-purpose lemmas. Most importantly, anontologytool
answers queries against a curated CoW knowledge corpus, returning the exact
Lean statement, description, source location, dependencies, and related concepts
for a named CoW entity, together with operations that list all lemmas in a con-
ceptualfamilyorreturnatheorem’sprerequisitechain.Thetoolsaregovernedby
an explicit priority hierarchy enforced through prompting: the Builder consults
the injected source first, then the CoW ontology for domain-specific lookups,
and only as a last resort the broader Mathlib search. This ordering highlights
a core design priority in LAMP. Specifically, the architecture privileges curated
domain knowledge over open-ended retrieval. The ontology tool then serves as
the vehicle for bringing this knowledge into the proof construction process.
Verifier:The Verifier is the final arbiter of correctness and the only component
that LAMP trusts to declare success. It submits a candidate proof to a Lean 4
REPL and parses the result into structured categories: errors, warnings, open
goals,andsorryoccurrences.Thisdistinctionseparatesaproofthatmerelycom-
piles (pass: no errors) from one that is genuinely finished (complete: no errors, no
sorries,nosorry-warnings).Parsederrorsarereturnedtotheagentsasstructured
feedback, including the offending goal state, so that recovery is informed rather
than blind. The verification backend, adapted from DeepSeek-Prover-V1.5 [48],
runs REPL instances as isolated worker processes with per-process resource lim-
its and timeouts, and a scheduler reaps stale processes, allowing many candidate
proofs to be checked concurrently and safely.
3.4 Algorithm
Algorithm 1 specifies LAMP’s control flow as a dual-loop procedure. Theouter
loop(the planning loop) requests a proof strategy from the Planner and may
re-plan up toR max times; theinner loop(the build loop) asks the Builder to
realize the current strategy as Lean tactics and may retry up toBmax times
per strategy. This yields up toRmax×B max verification attempts in total. Two
design decisions in the loop are not evident from the architecture alone and are
described after the listing.
Dual-stage verification:A candidate proof is accepted only if it passes two inde-
pendent checks (lines 9 and 14). The first is a purely textual test that the proof
contains nosorrytoken. The second compiles the proof in the Lean REPL and
requires that the result becomplete: free of errors, sorries, and sorry-warnings.
The textual stage is necessary because Lean acceptssorryas a well-typed place-
holder: a proof consisting ofsorryalone compiles without error, so a compila-
tion pass alone would register a false success. Requiring both stages eliminates
this failure mode.
Missing-definition fast path:When Builder fails, LAMP distinguisheswhyit
failed (line 16). If the error indicates that a referenced definition or lemma could

LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair 11
Algorithm 1LAMP proof synthesis
Require:theoremTwith asorryplaceholder; libraryL
Require:re-plan budgetR max, build budgetBmax
Ensure:a verified Lean 4 proof ofT, orf ailure
1:C←LoadContext(T,L)▷inject source of imported CoW modules
2:H P←∅▷persistent Planner history
3:forr←1toR max do
4:plan←Planner(T,C,H P )▷mathematical strategy; no Lean code
5:H B←∅▷Builder history, reset per strategy
6:forb←1toB max do
7:proof←Builder(plan,C,H B,Toolbox)▷may issue MCP tool calls
8:ifContainsSorry(proof)then▷stage 1: textual check
9:H B←H B∪{“proof still contains sorry”}
10:continue
11:end if
12:res←Verify(proof)▷stage 2: Lean REPL compilation
13:ifres.completethen▷no errors, no sorries
14:returnproof
15:else ifIsMissingDefinition(res)then
16:C←ReloadContext(T,L)▷cheap retry: re-ground, do not re-plan
17:H B←H B∪{res.errors}
18:else
19:H B←H B∪{res.errors}▷feed structured error back to Builder
20:end if
21:end for
22:H P←H P∪{summary of failed attempts for planr}▷Planner learns before
re-planning
23:end for
24:returnf ailure
not be found, this represents an addressing failure rather than a flaw in the strat-
egy. In this case, the Orchestrator re-injects the library context and retries the
build immediately (lines 17–18). It does this rather than discarding the strategy
and consuming an outer-loop re-plan. A genuine proof failure instead appends
the structured error to the Builder’s history (line 20) so that the next build at-
tempt can self-correct, and only when the inner budget is exhausted does control
return to the Planner (line 22), which revises the strategy using a summary of
what failed. This separation keeps inexpensive recovery (re-grounding) distinct
from expensive recovery (re-planning).
4 Experimental Results
We evaluate LAMP to answer five questions. (Q1) How well does LAMP syn-
thesize proofs in an unformalized domain? (Q2) Does LAMP’s performance
come from its tools and architecture, or from the underlying language model?
(Q3) Does the result depend on a particular model backbone? (Q4) How does

12 Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar
Table 2: Composition of the CoW Evaluation Suite.
Difficulty #Theorems Modules covered Example
Easy 15 8word_length_pos_of_ne_nil
Medium 58 8prefix_antisymm
Hard 17 5border_period_duality
T otal 908 —
LAMP compare with existing specialized provers on the same domain? (Q5) How
does it behave outside its target domain? We address these in Sections 4.2–4.5,
with a failure analysis following in Section 5.
4.1 Experimental Setup
Evaluation suite:We evaluate on the CoW Evaluation Suite, a curated collec-
tion of90theorems spanning all eight modules of the CoW library (Section 3.1)
and stratified into three difficulty levels: easy, medium, and hard. Difficulty was
assigned according to the expected proof length and reasoning depth: easy the-
orems are dischargeable in a few tactic steps using one or two library lemmas;
medium theorems require case analysis or induction over several steps; and hard
theorems require cross-module reasoning or the discovery of non-obvious inter-
mediate lemmas. Note that these labels reflect the complexity of theformal
proof task, not the mathematical difficulty a human prover or a mathematician
would perceive.The distribution of theorems across difficulty levels and modules
is given in Table 2; the complete list of all 90 theorems with per-backbone pass/-
fail results is given in Appendix B. We view this suite as a foundation rather
than an endpoint: its 90 theorems validate LAMP on a CoW library that did
not previously exist, and verified proofs can, after human review, be folded back
in to support harder results. LAMP’s role is thus not only to solve theorems but
to grow the foundation it solves them over.
Success criterion:A theorem is counted as solved only if the synthesized proof
passes LAMP’s dual-stage check (Section 3.4): it must contain nosorrytoken,
and it must compile to acompletestate under the Lean 4 REPL—no errors, no
sorries, and no sorry-warnings. This criterion admits no partial credit.
Metric:We report pass@1: a single synthesis attempt per theorem under the
standard attempt budget. We adopt pass@1 because it reflects realistic usage, in
which a practitioner runs the system once under fixed time and cost constraints
rather than sampling a proof many times in the hope that one attempt succeeds.
Note that LAMP’s internal repair loop (up toRmax = 3re-plans andB max = 3
build attempts per plan) operateswithina single pass@1 attempt and is distinct
from independent pass@ksampling.

LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair 13
Table 3: LAMP pass@1 on the CoW Evaluation Suite, by difficulty.
Difficulty #Theorems Solved Pass@1 (%)
Easy 15 15 100.0%
Medium 58 57 98.3%
Hard 17 15 88.2%
Overall 90 87 96.7%
Configurations:Unlessotherwisestated,LAMPusesKimi K2.6(MoonshotAI)
as its backbone model (API versionkimi-k2.6, endpointapi.moonshot.ai/v1)
at temperature1(the only value accepted by the Kimi K2.6 API). All exper-
iments use the same Mathlib snapshot (v4.17.0, pinned to commit5269898).
The Lean toolchain is fixed atleanprover/lean4:v4.17.0. Each verification
attempt is given a timeout of30seconds. Experiments were run on a single
machine equipped with a13th Gen Intel Core i7-13650HX(14 cores, 28
threads) CPU,24 GBRAM, and anNVIDIA GeF orce R TX 4060 Laptop
GPU (8 GB VRAM), runningUbuntu 24.04.3 L TS. The builder executes
up to9repair attempts (3 cycles×3 attempts per cycle) before declaring failure.
4.2 Main Result: CoW Proof Synthesis
Table 3 reports LAMP’s pass@1 rate on the CoW Evaluation Suite, stratified by
difficulty. LAMP solves87of90theorems, an overall pass rate of96.7%. Perfor-
mance by difficulty is100.0% (easy),98.3% (medium), and88.2% (hard); the
per-module breakdown appears in Table 10 (see Appendix B). Notably, LAMP
synthesizes a verified proof of border–period duality, a named CoW result requir-
ing a prefix and suffix decomposition chained through the Border, Factor, and
Period modules (full proof in Appendix C). These results indicate that LAMP
is effective not only on structural lemmas but also on theorems requiring multi-
step, cross-module reasoning.
4.3 Ablation: The Role of Architecture
The central claim of LAMP is that its performance is driven by its architectural
design. It integrates tool-grounded access to the domain ontology via MCP and
separates strategy from implementation, rather than by the backbone model
alone. We test this with two ablations, holding the3×3attempt budget and
injected library source fixed in both.No MCPremoves all tool access.Single
agentremoves the Planner: the Builder alone makes all nine calls, retaining full
MCP access, but must plan and prove.
Both ablations cost a comparable 11–12 points overall, with the loss concen-
trated almost entirely in Hard theorems (88.2% down to 47.1% and 58.8%); Easy
theorems are unaffected. This indicates that tool-grounded access to the domain
ontology and the Planner/Builder separation each contribute substantially, and
neither alone explains LAMP’s performance.

14 Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar
Table 4: Ablation study. All configurations use the same backbone model and
the same 9-call attempt budget; only the indicated component is removed.
Configuration Easy Medium Hard Overall∆
LAMP (full) 100.0% 98.3% 88.2%96.7%-
– no MCP 100.0% 91.4% 47.1% 84.4% 12.3
– single agent (9 Builder calls) 100.0% 89.7% 58.8% 85.6% 11.1
Table 5: Effect of the backbone model on LAMP, CoW suite (architecture fixed).
Model Pass@1 (%)
Backbone model96.7%
Claude Sonnet 4.5 88.9%
DeepSeek V4 Pro 68.9%
4.4 Backbone Comparison and Comparison with Existing Provers
LAMP is model-agnostic: any instruction-following LLM with tool-use support
can serve as the backbone for its agents. Table 5 reports LAMP’s pass@1 on the
CoW suite with the backbone varied, architecture and tools held fixed. LAMP
attains 96.7% with its backbone model, 88.9% with Claude Sonnet 4.5, and
68.9% with DeepSeek V4 Pro. We emphasize that this experiment varies only
theengineinside LAMP; it is distinct from the system-level comparison, where
complete proving systems compete against one another.
We now compare LAMP against specialized theorem-proving systems and an
unscaffolded baseline on the same CoW suite, with the same ontology context
given to every system, including the provers.
Table 6: System-level comparison on the CoW suite. All systems are given the
same ontology context.
System Pass@1 (%)
DeepSeek-Prover-V2 7B [30] 8.9%
Kimina-Prover 7B [42] 3.3%
Goedel-Prover-V2 32B [22] 1.1%
Backbone LLM, no agents 58.9%
LAMP 96.7%
Table 6 reports the result. Despite identical ontology access, the special-
ized provers solve almost nothing—8/90, 3/90, and 1/90 respectively—while the
backbone LLM alone solves 58.9% and LAMP reaches 96.7%. A miniF2F san-
ity check on Goedel-Prover-V2 confirms it is a functioning prover, producing

LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair 15
Table 7: Out-of-domain evaluation on a balanced 32-problem subset of miniF2F
(8 problems per domain). All results are Pass@1.
Model Algebra Comp. Math Induction Num. Theory Overall
Backbone model 100 100 100 87.5 96.9
DeepSeek V4 Pro 75.0 37.5 62.5 50.0 56.2
Claude Sonnet 4.5 87.5 12.5 25.0 12.5 34.4
valid in-distribution proofs (8B:6/10, 32B:2/10), so its near-total failure on
CoW is not a broken pipeline. The gap instead reflects architecture: specialized
provers are trained to emit tactics directly from a fixed Mathlib-centered distri-
bution and have no mechanism to consume retrieved ontology context, whereas
a general-purpose LLM can read and apply it directly, and LAMP’s agentic
structure exploits it further still.
4.5 Out-of-Domain Generalization
To evaluate LAMP’s generalization beyond its target domain, we assess all three
models on a balanced 32-problem subset of miniF2F [53], drawn equally from
four domains: algebra, competition mathematics, induction, and number theory
(8problemseach).Thisbalancedsamplingensuresrepresentativecoverageacross
problem types rather than favoring any single category. A full evaluation across
all 244 miniF2F problems was not feasible within our computational budget,
as each theorem requires multiple Planner, Builder cycles with repeated MCP
tool invocations and Lean REPL verification. This makes large-scale evaluation
significantly expensive. The 32-problem balanced subset was designed to provide
a principled and reproducible cross-section of LAMP’s out-of-domain behaviour
under these constraints.
Table 7 reports the Pass@1 results across all three models. Backbone model
(Kimi K2.6) achieves 96.9%, while DeepSeek V4 Pro achieves 56.2% and Claude
Sonnet 4.5 achieves 34.4%. The significant variance across models suggests that
out-of-domain generalization in LAMP is strongly governed by the model’s agen-
tic tool-use capabilities rather than the framework itself. Claude’s drop from
88.9% on CoW to 34.4% on miniF2F further indicates that its strong CoW per-
formance is partly attributable to LAMP’s domain-specific ontology and seman-
tic retrieval tools, which provide little leverage on Mathlib-centered competition
problems. We note that these Pass@1 results do not constitute a direct com-
parison with dedicated prover models evaluated on the full miniF2F benchmark
under pass@kprotocols; a comprehensive comparison under unified evaluation
conditions remains future work.
5 Discussion and Limitations
The above evaluation provides a quantitative overview of model performance;
however, a deeper understanding requires examining where and why the models

16 Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar
Table 8: Classification of LAMP’s 38 failure instances on the CoW suite (Claude
Sonnet 4.5 + DeepSeek v4 Pro combined).
Failure Category Count %
Incorrect proof strategy 29 76.3
Invalid Lean syntax 7 18.4
Ill-posed (false) theorem 2 5.3
fail. Accordingly, we proceed with a detailed failure analysis of the backbone
model to characterize its limitations and discuss future improvements.
Failure Analysis:An analysis of the failed proofs for Backbone model (Kimi
K2.6) reveals distinct failure modes. The two failures in suffix_of_pow_le and
hasPeriod_pow_lengthstemmedfromcomplexmodularindexinglookups.Mean-
while,thefailureinprimitive_minimal_period_is_lengthoccurredbecausethe
theorem statement within the dataset is mathematically false; the multi-agent
Planner correctly identified this flaw and refused to generate a proof.
We examined the 38 proof attempts that LAMP failed to complete using the
Claude Sonnet 4.5 and DeepSeek v4 Pro backbones and classified the failures
into the categories shown in Table 8. The dominant category was incorrect proof
strategy(76.3%), where the agent produced a plausible plan but could not close
all proof obligations, typically leavingsorryplaceholders after exhausting all
re-planning attempts. Seven theorems, related to the Factor, Period, and Bor-
der modules, failed under both backbones, indicating that these proofs require
multi-step modular-arithmetic reasoning overList.get?indices that exceeds
current LLM capabilities regardless of backbone choice. The second category,
invalid Lean syntax(18.4%), consisted entirely of DeepSeek failures on Easy
and Medium theorems that both Kimi K2.6 and Claude Sonnet solved; the
proof ideas were correct, but the generated code referenced non-existent identi-
fiers or applied wrong projection syntax, suggesting lower Lean 4 surface-syntax
fidelity for DeepSeek. Two failures(5.3%)stemmed from the same ill-posed the-
orem discussed above; neither Claude nor DeepSeek identified its falsity, unlike
Kimi K2.6. Notably, no failures were attributable to verification timeouts or tool
retrieval errors, confirming that LAMP’s MCP-based infrastructure operates re-
liably and that the performance ceiling is determined by backbone reasoning
quality rather than system-level bottlenecks. We now discuss the broader impli-
cations of these results, along with key limitations and future directions.
Thecentralfindingofourevaluationisthatageneral-purposelanguagemodel
equipped with curated domain tooling outperforms specialized provers in a do-
main for which no training corpus exists, and that this advantage depends on
LAMP’s tool-grounded architecture and its Planner/Builder separation, not on
the backbone model alone (Section 4.3). We read this as evidence that, for un-
formalized domains, the binding constraint is not the model’s reasoning capacity
but its access to the domain’s vocabulary and the relationships among its defi-

LAMP: Lean-based Agentic framework with MCP and Proof Repair 17
nitions. Specialized provers encode such knowledge implicitly, through training
on a fixed Mathlib-centered corpus, and consequently degrade when that corpus
does not cover the target domain [36]. LAMP instead supplies the knowledge
explicitly and at inference time,making it retargetable to new domains through
library curation rather than model retraining. This gives a solution for formal-
izing further unformalized domains.
Limitations and Future Work:The CoW Evaluation Suite is self-constructed,
and its difficulty labels reflect our own judgement rather than an external stan-
dard; pass rates on it are not directly comparable to established benchmarks. As
noted in Section 4.1, the suite is a foundation rather than an endpoint, and the
samelibrary-growthloopcanextendittowardthefield’shardestclassicalresults,
such as the Fine-Wilf theorem [8]. More broadly, results routinely dismissed as
“obvious” in informal mathematics (e.g., the border-period duality, recorded only
as a remark in [32]) require explicit machine-checked proofs on which stronger
statements depend. This gap between “easy to see” and “accepted by the kernel”
is where much formalisation effort concentrates and where the domain ontology
contributes most. LAMP’s performance is also sensitive to the backbone model
(Section 4.4); the gap to open-source backbones is substantial, so LAMP is best
understood as a method for extracting domain-specific proving capability from a
capable general-purpose model, not a model-agnostic guarantee. This motivates
a future hybrid design in which the Planner remains general-purpose while the
Builder is a prover-specialized model adapted to MCP tool calling, a split the
Planner/Builder separation was designed to accommodate, since current spe-
cialized provers (e.g. Kimina-Prover [42], DeepSeek-Prover-V2 [30]) do not yet
expose native tool-calling interfaces. Finally, our comparison with specialized
provers spans a single unformalized domain; whether explicit domain tooling
and the library-growth loop transfer to other such domains remains open, and
is the natural next test of this methodology.
6 Conclusion
We presented LAMP, a multi-agent framework that synthesizes kernel-verified
Lean 4 proofs by supplying curated domain knowledge to a general-purpose lan-
guage model at inference time, together with a Lean 4 formalization of CoW, a
domain previously absent from Mathlib, on which we evaluated it. Across a suite
of 90 CoW theorems spanning eight modules and three difficulty levels, LAMP
synthesized verified proofs for 96.7% of theorems, and an ablation showed that
this performance depends on LAMP’s tool-grounded architecture rather than
the backbone model alone. These results indicate that for domains lacking a
formalized corpus, the decisive factor is explicit, structured access to domain
knowledge, which a tool-augmented agent can exploit without retraining. The
suite’s 87 verified proofs are themselves candidates for the library. Folding them
back would grow it from 93 to as many as 180 declarations, the kind of com-
pounding foundation LAMP is designed to build as it solves. We release the
CoW library and evaluation suite to support this and the further work.

18 Santhana Srinivasan R and Maithilee Patawar
