record_id: arxiv:2605.04251
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.04251
fetched_title: Root-Cause-Driven Automated Vulnerability Repair
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:13Z

Root-Cause-Driven Automated Vulnerability Repair
Hulin Wang
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, USA
hwang551@asu.edu
Zion Leonahenahe
Basque
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, USA
zbasque@asu.edu
Jie Hu
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, USA
jiehu12@asu.edu
Ati Priya Bajaj
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, USA
atipriya@asu.edu
Yibo Liu
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, USA
yiboliu@asu.edu
Samuel Zhu
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, USA
sjzhu@asu.edu
Giorgi Kobakhia
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, USA
gkobakhi@asu.edu
Nikhil Chapre
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, USA
nchapre@asu.edu
Will Rosenberg
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, USA
whrosenb@asu.edu
Siddharth Mishra
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, USA
smish149@asu.edu
Aditya Maheshbhai
Gabani
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, USA
agabani@asu.edu
Moritz Schloegel
CISPA Helmholtz Center
for Information Security
Saarbrücken, Germany
moritz.schloegel@cispa.de
Adam Doupé
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, USA
doupe@asu.edu
Yan Shoshitaishvili
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, USA
yans@asu.edu
Ruoyu Wang
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, USA
fishw@asu.edu
Tiffany Bao
Arizona State University
Tempe, AZ, USA
tbao@asu.edu
Abstract
Recent LLM-based systems have made automated vulnerability
repair increasingly practical, but two challenges remain. First, with-
out strong signals about where a bug originates, repair agents drift
toward shallow edits that silence the observed failure while leaving
the underlying defect unresolved. Second, finding the root cause
for bugs is hard: even developers familiar with the codebase fre-
quently produce fixes that address symptoms rather than the root
cause, and LLM-based agents, operating with noisier context and
less program understanding, are no exception.
We present Kumushi1, a root-cause-driven patching agent that
addresses both challenges by combining diversified dynamic fault
localization with evidence-weighted ranking to focus the LLM on
the code most relevant to the defect. To rigorously measure whether
Kumushi produces genuinely better patches, we also introduce a
two-tier patch quality metric that pairs automated oracle validation
with structured expert assessment of patches.
1Kumushi: “Kumu” is Hawaiian for “root, ” or “teacher, ” and “shi” is Chinese for
“teacher”; together, the term denotes a teacher of root cause.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than the
author(s) must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or
republish, to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission
and/or a fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Anonymous Submission to ACM CCS 2017, Dallas, Texas
©2017 Copyright held by the owner/author(s). Publication rights licensed to ACM.
ACM ISBN 978-x-xxxx-xxxx-x/YYYY/MM
https://doi.org/10.1145/nnnnnnn.nnnnnnn
Evaluated on 178 C/C++ vulnerabilities,Kumushisubstantially
outperforms prior specialized repair agents under automated eval-
uation while matching a frontier commercial coding agent. Expert
assessment then reveals differences that oracles cannot: Kumushi
produces more root-cause fixes and fewer superficial patches, and
is preferred in the majority of decisive pairwise comparisons. To-
gether, these results demonstrate that progress in automated vul-
nerability repair requires not only stronger patching systems, but
also richer evaluation methods capable of distinguishing genuine
fixes from oracle-passing ones.
CCS Concepts
•Security and privacy → Use https://dl.acm.org/ccs.cfm to gen-
erate actual concepts section for your paper.
Keywords
automated program repair, patch generation, root cause
1 Introduction
Automated vulnerability repair is becoming increasingly critical as
the volume of disclosed vulnerabilities continues to grow. Modern
fuzzing infrastructure, such as OSS-Fuzz [20], has found thousands
of bugs accompanied by reproducible proofs of concept (PoCs).
More recently, efforts such as Project Glasswing [4] have uncov-
ered thousands of more vulnerabilities in critical software and
show no sign of waning. The resulting backlog far outpaces devel-
opers’ triaging capacity, creating a strong demand for tools that can
quickly generate correct patches for vulnerable source code [36].
Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) have given rise
to a new class of LLM-based patching agents [30, 34, 56, 57, 61] that
1
arXiv:2605.04251v1 [cs.CR] 5 May 2026

Anonymous Submission to ACM CCS 2017, Due 19 May 2017, Dallas, Texas
Hulin Wang, Zion Leonahenahe Basque, Jie Hu, Ati Priya Bajaj, Yibo Liu, Samuel Zhu, Giorgi Kobakhia, Nikhil Chapre, Will Rosenberg, Siddharth Mishra, Aditya Maheshbhai
Gabani, Moritz Schloegel, Adam Doupé, Yan Shoshitaishvili, Ruoyu Wang, and Tiffany Bao
address this problem through an iterative workflow: the agent first
localizesthe fault, thensynthesizesa candidate patch, and finally
validatesit against replay-based test oracles comprising the original
PoC and the developer test suite. If validation fails, the agent feeds
the error signal back to drive the next round of localization and
patch generation. The loop repeats until all oracles pass. Prior work
has substantially improved this iterative loop by enabling agents to
leverage program analysis techniques, such as static analysis [57],
symbolic execution [56], and dynamic analysis approaches [61].
Despite recent advances in agentic patching, we observe that
existing patching agents fail to reliably address the root causes of
vulnerabilities and generate incomplete or incorrect patches. First,
root cause localization is fundamentally limited by the underlying
analysis techniques. Static approaches, such asPatchAgent[ 57],
cannot precisely resolve indirect calls, leading to incorrect localiza-
tion in cases like the heap out-of-bounds vulnerability in mruby [35].
In contrast, dynamic approaches based on symbolic execution (e.g.,
LoopRepair[ 56]) suffer from poor scalability and fail to handle this
case in practice. Second, LLM-based patch generation is unstable
due to its sensitivity to noisy context. Even when the correct fix
location is identified, agents frequently drift and produce incorrect
edits [2, 59]. For example, when fixing a heap buffer overflow in
hunspell [40],PatchAgentcorrectly identifies the fix location but
ultimately patches a nearby incorrect location, distracted by irrele-
vant context. Both limitations are critical and must be resolved for
identifying and fixing root causes effectively.
In this paper, we present Kumushi, a root cause-driven patching
agent that addresses the issues identified above. To balance the ad-
vantages and limitations of static and dynamic analyses, Kumushi
employsdiversified dynamic fault localization: instead of relying on
static analysis alone, it collects execution evidence from a family of
crash-triggering inputs, exposing root cause-correlated functions
that a single trace would not surface. To prevent LLM’s context drift,
Kumushi employs anevidence-weighted rankingstage that consoli-
dates the candidate pool into a ranked set of Functions of Interest,
which concentrates the agent’s attention on the most crash-relevant
code before patch generation begins.
We evaluate the effectiveness ofKumushi and existing approaches
in repairing the root causes of software vulnerabilities on real-world
open-source projects. During the development of evaluation, we
observe that assessing root cause repair is inherently challenging
due to the lack of areliable ground truth. This creates a chicken-
and-egg problem: identifying the root cause of a vulnerability is
itself non-trivial, which makes it difficult to determine whether a
patch correctly addresses it. Automatic root cause identification
could be an interesting solution, but it remains an open research
problem. Prior work usually treats developer patches as ground
truth; however, studies have shown that a significant fraction of
developer patches fail to address the underlying defect. Even devel-
opers deeply familiar with the codebase frequently produce fixes
that target symptoms rather than root causes [26, 32, 51].
An alternative is to rely on replay-based oracles [ 24], which
re-execute the original PoC and developer test suites to verify that
a patch suppresses the observed crash while preserving existing
functionality. However, these oracles, analogous to dynamic testing
in Programming Language theory, are complete but not sound2: a
patch may eliminate the observed failure and pass all tests while
leaving the underlying defect reachable through alternative exe-
cution paths [51], even when test suites are augmented with au-
tomated techniques such as fuzzing. This coverage gap limits the
ability of oracle-based evaluation to distinguish true root-cause
fixes from superficial repairs. Therefore, accurately assessing patch
quality requires deeper analysis beyond what automated oracles
alone can provide. However, such analysis typically requires secu-
rity expertise and substantial manual effort, which does not scale to
comprehensive, real-world evaluations. Consequently, it remains
difficult to design an evaluation methodology that balances accu-
racy and practicality for large-scale, real-world systems.
To effectively evaluate Kumushi, we introduce a two-tier root-
cause repair quality metric that combines automated oracle valida-
tion (“tier 1”) with structured expert assessment (“tier 2”) of patch
completeness and correctness.
This framework enables a more rigorous evaluation of auto-
mated vulnerability patching systems such as Kumushi and pro-
vides stronger evidence of its ability to generate genuine root-cause
fixes compared to existing state-of-the-art patching tools.
We evaluated Kumushi on 178 C/C++ vulnerabilities against
three state-of-the-art works from academia and industry:PatchA-
gent[ 57],LoopRepair[ 56], and OpenAI’sCodex[ 37]. Under tier-1
oracle-based evaluation, Kumushi reaches a plausible patch rate
of 85%, outperformingPatchAgent(72%) andLoopRepair(2%),
confirming the effectiveness of our root cause-driven localization.
However, we observe that Kumushi andCodexare statistically
indistinguishable under all three replay-based oracles: replaying
the PoC, executing the test suite, and replaying fuzzer-generated
variant PoCs. This is a direct manifestation of the oracle coverage
gap identified above. Both tools produce a similar percentage of
plausible patches, but automated oracles alone cannot tell us which
tool produces better patches.
Applying tier-2 expert assessment provides the deeper analy-
sis needed to distinguish the two: Kumushi produces more root-
cause fixes and fewer superficial patches thanCodex. On the 144
bugs where both tools produced a plausible patch, human experts
conducting an blind assessment preferred Kumushi on 68 (47%),
Codexon 39 (27%), and judged 37 (26%) cases as equivalent; a sign
test on the 107 decisive pairs gives 𝑝= 0.0065, confirming that
Kumushi produces a statistically significantly greater number of
better patches when bug difficulty is controlled.
Contributions:We make the following contributions:
• We identify two recurring limitations in state-of-the-art LLM-
based patching tools: static-only fault localization consistently
fails to pinpoint root causes, and unfiltered context causes agents
to pivot toward crash-site suppression rather than root-cause
repair. We further identify that existing oracle-based evaluation
cannot reliably differentiate genuine root-cause fixes from super-
ficial ones.
• We propose a root cause-driven patching approach that addresses
both limitations through diversified dynamic fault localization
2In PL theory, a system is sound if a program that passes the system’s checking will
not exhibit certain forbidden behaviors at runtime.
2

Root-Cause-Driven Automated Vulnerability Repair Anonymous Submission to ACM CCS 2017, Due 19 May 2017, Dallas, Texas
and evidence-weighted FOI ranking, and implement and open-
sourceKumushias a prototype of this approach.
• We conduct a two-tier evaluation on 178 C/C++ vulnerabilities.
Kumushi outperformsPatchAgentby 18% in plausible patches
(tier 1), and human experts prefer Kumushi patches over those
ofCodexby a 20% margin (tier 2). Notably, this preference gap
is invisible to automated oracles and emerges only under human
judgment.
2 Background and Motivation
We briefly discuss relevant background and investigate patch qual-
ity of existing approaches.
2.1 LLM-based Automated Program Repair
Software vulnerability repair has long been studied under the um-
brella of Automated Program Repair (APR). Early approaches re-
lied on templates [15, 29, 33, 46], search-based mutations [17, 21],
semantic-based approaches[16, 18, 25, 44], and learning-based mod-
els [9, 62] to synthesize candidate patches. Recent advances in LLMs
have changed the landscape, enabling repair tools that reason over
code at the semantic level. LLM-based patch generation follows two
general approaches. Prompt-based techniques [30, 34] query the
model directly with engineered prompts that supply the bug report,
surrounding code context, and optional chain-of-thought scaffold-
ing, then treat the model’s response as a candidate patch. On the
other hand, agent-based techniques [56, 57, 61] embed the LLM in
an iterative loop equipped with tools for code navigation, compi-
lation, and test execution, allowing the agent to gather evidence,
propose patches, and refine them across rounds. Within the agent-
based approach, state-of-the-art systems differ chiefly in how they
localize the root cause:PatchAgentequips the LLM with code-
navigation tools (e.g., viewcode) and delegates localization entirely
to the model. Starting from the sanitizer report, the agent retrieves
source context iteratively and reasons about the defect statically,
with no dynamic signal beyond the crash stack.LoopRepairlocal-
izes through concolic execution. Replaying the PoC under KLEE, it
tracks how crash-relevant input bytes propagate through the pro-
gram, retains the program points that carry the full taint, and ranks
them by their distance to the crash. Each candidate is paired with
a crash-free constraint, producing a semantically grounded set of
suspect locations.CodeRover-Slocalizes through dynamic tracing.
The PoC is executed on an instrumented binary that captures the full
caller/callee graph of the buggy run. Functions that executed but are
absent from the crash stack are resolved to source symbols and ap-
pended to the sanitizer report, giving the agent execution-grounded
seeds beyond what the bare stack trace provides. More recently,
general-purpose coding agents [3, 37, 39] have demonstrated strong
competence on software-engineering benchmarks [27], vulnerabil-
ity reproduction [50], PoC generation [31], code review [63] and
can be applied to vulnerability repair tasks [31, 58] with minimal
task-specific configuration efforts.
2.2 Patch Quality Evaluation in Practice
A high-quality patch should repair the faulty invariant at the source
of a vulnerability rather than merely mitigate the observed crash.
Verifying this property is itself a research problem, but two evalua-
tion methods are common in practice: manual expert review and
dynamic oracle validation.
In expert reviews, a reviewer reconstructs the root cause from
the crash report and PoC behavior and judges whether the patch
addresses the underlying defect rather than guarding the crash site.
The judgment is usually reliable but labor-intensive, and it does
not scale to address the size of modern vulnerability backlogs.
In terms of automated validation, the field usually relies on
replay-based oracles, including PoC replay, developer test suite re-
execution, and fuzzing-based variant exploration [24]. PoC replay
checks if the reported crash no longer reproduces after the patch
has been applied [ 34, 56]. Similarly, developer test suites are re-
executed to check if documented behavior is preserved [ 42, 57].
Fuzzing campaigns seeded from the original PoC can be used to
explore nearby inputs and provide a stronger guard against variants
that re-trigger the defect [26, 51].
We observe that these oracles are complete but not sound. A
patch may pass every replay-based check while leaving the un-
derlying defect reachable through alternative execution paths [51].
Two patches that pass the same oracle suite can therefore differ
substantially in whether they repair the root cause.
2.3 Preliminary Study
To understand the limitations of state-of-the-art LLM-based patch-
ing tools in practice, we conduct a preliminary study. We first run
10 independent trials ofPatchAgentfor each bug and identify
24 bugs that it fails to patch in every run. Using this subset of
bugs, we examine whether other state-of-the-art tools, including
LoopRepair[56], exhibit similar limitations.
We observe thatPatchAgentfails to locate or examine the cor-
rect fix location for 9 out of 24 bugs, suggesting that static analysis
alone is insufficient to pinpoint root causes. We use the developer
patch as the definition of the correct fix location for these cases.
While tools such asLoopRepairincorporate dynamic information,
for instance, constraints derived from symbolic execution, they face
significant scalability and generality challenges. In our evaluation,
the KLEE symbolic execution engine used byLoopRepairfailed to
execute on all 24 targets, producing no patches. From these obser-
vations, we believe our system needs to use lightweight dynamic
analysis that avoids the overhead of formal symbolic execution
while still grounding the repair process in runtime evidence.
Throughout our experiment, we also observe that thePatchA-
gent’s reasoning frequently surfaces the right location, but lengthy
call chains, unrelated source files, and tangential snippets accumu-
late alongside it. Under this noise, the LLMs drift from the correct
fix sites and edits elsewhere. In our study, 9 out of 24 bugs follow
this drift pattern: the LLM initially examines the correct line, but
the surrounding context pulls it away. In another 6, it stays on the
correct line but repeatedly produces patches that either fail to com-
pile or fail to mitigate the crash, exhausting its repair budget. These
15 cases suggest that even when the correct location is identified,
ineffective context filtering remains a critical barrier to successful
repair.
In summary, these two observations motivateKumushi’s design:
(1)Static analysis alone cannot pinpoint the root cause.
3

Anonymous Submission to ACM CCS 2017, Due 19 May 2017, Dallas, Texas
Hulin Wang, Zion Leonahenahe Basque, Jie Hu, Ati Priya Bajaj, Yibo Liu, Samuel Zhu, Giorgi Kobakhia, Nikhil Chapre, Will Rosenberg, Siddharth Mishra, Aditya Maheshbhai
Gabani, Moritz Schloegel, Adam Doupé, Yan Shoshitaishvili, Ruoyu Wang, and Tiffany Bao
(2)Unfiltered context drowns out the correct fix site.
3Kumushi: Root-Cause-Driven Patch
Generation
Motivated by these observations, we propose Kumushi, a dynamic-
diversified, root-cause-focused, agentic patch generation frame-
work that jointly addresses fault localization accuracy and patch
quality. As shown in Figure 1,Kumushi accepts three inputs (a san-
itizer report, the original proof-of-concept (PoC), and the project
codebase) and operates through three tightly coupled stages. First,
Diversified Fault Localizationconstructs a failure-relevant candi-
date pool. It combines crash-stack extraction from the sanitizer
report, dynamic function-call traces from fuzzer-generated crash
variants of the original PoC, and static dependency analysis. Sec-
ond,Evidence-Weighted FoI Rankingconsolidates the pool into a
focused top-20 set of Functions of Interest. It scores each candi-
date against crash-class-conditioned evidence tags, then applies a
diversity-aware rerank so the patch agent receives distinct hypothe-
ses across source files. Finally,Agentic Patch Generationconsumes
the ranked FoIs as context. The patch agent iteratively explores the
codebase and synthesizes candidate patches, while an automated
verifier checks each edit against oracles. The agent emits a patch
only when all three checks pass. The remainder of this section
details each stage.
3.1 Stage 1: Diversified Fault Localization
Stage 1 collects a broad pool of functions likely correlated with the
vulnerability’s root cause. Stage 2 then consolidates, scores, and
filters this pool into the focused top-20 FoI set that guides patch
generation. Motivated by the localization limitations identified
in section 2, Kumushi addresses both the coverage gap of static-
only approaches and the scalability limitations of heavyweight
dynamic analysis through a two-step collection process.
Dynamic FoI Collection via Fuzzing.Rather than reasoning from
a single crashing execution, Kumushi first diversifies the original
PoC using AFL++ [ 11] (v4.40c) in crash exploration mode with
a 12-hour time budget per bug. In crash exploration mode, the
fuzzer takes the original crashing input as a seed and mutates it to
generate new inputs, retaining only those that still crash the target.
Aurora [5] observed that crash variants derived from the same seed
tend to trigger the same underlying bug via different execution
paths. The resulting family of variant inputs therefore exposes
more root-cause-correlated functions than any single trace alone.
Crash exploration may occasionally produce inputs that trigger a
different bug. Stage 2’s evidence-weighted scoring down-weights
functions that appear only in a minority of traces, mitigating such
outliers.
For each variant in the diversified PoC family, Kumushi instru-
ments the target binary with function-entry hooks and replays the
variant under the instrumented binary. Every function executed on
the path to the crash is emitted as a candidate FoI and enters the
pool.Kumushiadditionally parses the ASan report of the original
PoC and extracts every function named on the crash stack as a
candidate FoI. Prior study found that the fix for roughly 60% of
cases patched a function on the crash stack [10]. The union of all
per-variant execution traces and the crash-stack functions forms
the dynamic candidate pool.
Static FoI Augmentation via Dependency Analysis.Dynamic
tracing captures functions that actually execute but may miss func-
tions that influence the crash site through data dependencies not ex-
ercised by the available inputs. To augment FoI coverage,Kumushi
applies CodeQL static dependency analysis [19], but deliberately re-
stricts it to the subset of functions that appear in the original PoC’s
ASan report. Applying static analysis to all dynamic candidates
would re-introduce the over-approximation problem, exploding
the candidate pool with functions only loosely related to the crash.
By anchoring static analysis to the ASan report subset, Kumushi
obtains the precision benefits of crash-stack grounding while still
recovering candidates that dynamic tracing alone would miss.
Concretely, CodeQL’s intra-procedural dataflow query (DataFlow
::localFlow) identifies variables whose values flow into the crash-
line variables within the crash site function. A second CodeQL
query enumerates all functions that read or write variables of match-
ing name and access type. Whole-program dataflow is out of scope
at our evaluation scale.
Beyond the local dataflow analysis, we take up to ten call-stack
functions from the sanitizer report asanchorsand perform a bounded
bidirectional breadth-first traversal of the call graph: upstream to
callers and downstream to callees. For spatial and temporal bugs
we include allocation frames; for temporal bugs we also include
free frames. For each discovered function 𝑓 , we track three signals:
the number of anchors from which 𝑓 is reachable,|anchors(𝑓)| ;
the number of call edges landing on 𝑓 , edgehits(𝑓) ; and the shortest
distance from any anchor to 𝑓 , mindepth(𝑓) . A function reached by
many anchors, via many edges, at shallow depth is more likely to
be implicated in the crash. We rank candidates lexicographically by
⟨−|anchors|,−edge hits,min depth⟩ and retain the top 300 to bound
pool growth. If too few candidates are returned, we widen the
search by adding more call-stack, allocation-stack, and free-stack
functions and merge the results.
After both steps, Kumushi merges the dynamically diversified
candidates and the statically augmented candidates into a single
pool of crash-correlated FoIs. Stage 2 then consolidates, scores, and
ranks this pool.
3.2 Stage 2: Evidence-Weighted FoI Ranking
Stage 2 takes the merged candidate pool from Stage 1 and produces
a focused, ranked top-20 FoI set that serves as the repair context
for the patch agent. Each candidate in the pool carries one or more
source tags indicating which collection step contributed it. The tags
mark a function as appearing on the crash stack, in a per-variant
dynamic execution trace, on an allocation or free stack from the
sanitizer, at a sanitizer-reported object-origin site, or in the static
variable-dependency results. A candidate contributed by multiple
steps carries multiple tags, and the scoring step below uses this
overlap as its primary signal.
We first consolidate the pool, discarding functions that cannot
plausibly be the defect site: fuzzing harnesses and entry wrap-
pers (e.g., LLVMFuzzerTestOneInput), standard library primitives
(memcpy, malloc, and similar), and candidates rooted in test or
fuzzer directories. Duplicates contributed by multiple steps are
4

Root-Cause-Driven Automated Vulnerability Repair Anonymous Submission to ACM CCS 2017, Due 19 May 2017, Dallas, Texas
Diversified Fault
Localization
Evidence Weighted
FOI Ranking
Static FOI
Augmentation
Dynamic FOI
Collection
Ranked
FOI
Sanitizer
Report
Original
PoC
Project
Code
Agentic Patch Generation
LLM Agent
Patch Verifier
FailedVerify
Patch
Code
Success
FOIs
Deduplication
& Ranking
Figure 1: Overview of Kumushi. Given a sanitizer report, crash input, and project codebase, the Diversified Fault Localization
stage produces a pool of Functions of Interest (FoIs); the Evidence-Weighted FoI Ranking stage consolidates and ranks them
into a top-20 list; and the Agentic Patch Generation stage iteratively produces and verifies a patch, looping back with additional
information on each failure until the patch is validated.
fused into a single record whose tag set is the union of the origi-
nals’. We then score each surviving candidate. Tag weights depend
on the crash class. For temporal errors such as use-after-free, the
free stack carries the greatest weight; for contract violations such as
null dereference, the crash stack carries it instead. To prevent corre-
lated sources from being counted multiple times, we first partition
tags into evidence families.
For instance, free-stack, allocation-stack, and object-origin share
one family because all three describe the same allocation event.
Within a family 𝑓 , Kumushi aggregates the active tag weights using
an OWA-style operator [55]:
𝑠𝑓 =min

𝑐 𝑓 , 𝑤(1)+𝛼
∑︁
𝑖≥2
𝑤(𝑖)

,(1)
where 𝑤(1)≥𝑤(2)≥. . . are the bug-class weights of the active
tags in that family, 𝛼< 1discounts additional same-family tags
to reflect correlation rather than independence, and 𝑐 𝑓 limits the
maximum contribution of family𝑓.
Intuitively, the strongest tag in a family determines the primary
contribution, while the remaining tags provide only attenuated
reinforcement, since tags from the same family often witness the
same underlying fact. The cap𝑐 𝑓 encodes the maximum confidence
that the family can contribute in principle. For example, stack-trace
evidence, which places the function directly on the crashing control
flow, contributes more than call-trace evidence, which shows only
that the function executed.
We then combine the family-level scores with a noisy-OR [43]:
𝑠=1−
Ö
𝑓
(1−𝑠 𝑓),(2)
under the standard assumption that evidence families provide in-
dependent support for defectiveness. Example 1 illustrates the re-
sulting behavior. A single strong evidence family can substantially
raise the final score, while weak or missing families do not pull
down the contribution of stronger ones. The two operators serve
complementary purposes. The OWA-style aggregation controls re-
dundancy within a family, where multiple tags may be correlated
observations of the same event. The noisy-OR combines support
across families, where each family represents a distinct source by
which a defect may manifest.
Given a score per candidate, the ranker produces the final list
in two passes. We first rank by raw score, then apply a file-level
diversity rerank to the tail. The rerank prefers candidates from
source files not yet selected, so the patch agent receives distinct
hypotheses rather than near-duplicates from the same file. We then
truncate the list to match the patch agent’s context budget.
Example 1.Consider three use-after-free FoIs drawn from the same
tag vocabulary (stack-trace0 .85,free-stack0 .90,alloc-stack0 .65,
object-origin0 .55; 𝛼=0.25, 𝑐crash=0.97, 𝑐alloc=0.95). By tag-family
taxonomy,stack-traceis a crash-stack tag, whilefree-stack,alloc-
stack, andobject-originare allocation-family tags. Each FoI fires its
own subset.
(1)do_close firesstack-trace(crash family) and bothfree-stack
andalloc-stack(allocation family). It scores0.9925:
• allocation family: 𝑠alloc =min( 0.95, 0.90+ 0.25· 0.65)= 0.95
•crash-stack family:𝑠 crash =min(0.97,0.85)=0.85
•noisy-OR:𝑠=1−(1−0.85)(1−0.95)=0.9925
(2) A FoI witnessed only by allocation-family tags — with any com-
bination offree-stack,alloc-stack, andobject-originactive —
cannot exceed calloc =0.95 , since no crash-family term enters the
noisy-OR.
(3) A FoI tagged only bystack-traceon the crash stack scores0.85.
The ordering0 .85 < 0.95 < 0.9925makes the design choice visible:
no amount of within-family evidence, even at saturation, overtakes a
candidate witnessed across two independent families. Kumushi ranks
breadth of evidence above depth.
3.3 Stage 3: Agentic Patch Generation
The patch agent is an LLM agent driven by a structured prompt
and a small tool set. The prompt supplies the sanitizer report, the
top-20FoIs together with their source code, an explore-then-edit
workflow, and fix-quality guidelines for patching vulnerabilities.
We equip the agent with read-only tools to navigate the clang-
indexed codebase, a string-substitution tool to edit source files, and
a verifier to validate patches. Every run operates on a freshly copied,
git-baselined working directory so that the agent can explore the
codebase and edit files without affecting the original codebase.
5

Anonymous Submission to ACM CCS 2017, Due 19 May 2017, Dallas, Texas
Hulin Wang, Zion Leonahenahe Basque, Jie Hu, Ati Priya Bajaj, Yibo Liu, Samuel Zhu, Giorgi Kobakhia, Nikhil Chapre, Will Rosenberg, Siddharth Mishra, Aditya Maheshbhai
Gabani, Moritz Schloegel, Adam Doupé, Yan Shoshitaishvili, Ruoyu Wang, and Tiffany Bao
After each edit, the patch verifier applies three progressively
stricter validation checks: compiling the patched project under Ad-
dressSanitizer, replaying the original crashing PoC, and re-executing
the project’s existing test suite. If any check fails, the verifier re-
turns the failure output to the agent to guide its next exploration or
edit. The agent then can refine its hypothesis and try again. Until
the first time the patch passes all three checks, the run terminates
and the agent emits the patch. The agent runtime caps each run at
150 turns to prevent infinite loops.
4 Evaluation
We design experiments to study three research questions:
• RQ1: How do LLM-based patching agents compare under dy-
namic oracle-based evaluation?
• RQ2: How do root-cause-driven and general-purpose LLM-based
patching agents differ in patch comprehensiveness, and what
repair strategies and failure modes characterize each?
• RQ3: What factors drive patch quality differences between root-
cause-driven and general-purpose LLM-based patching agents,
and what do they reveal about the strengths and limitations of
root-cause-anchored patching?
4.1 Experiment Setup
Tools.We compare Kumushi against three state-of-the-art tech-
niques that represent the spectrum of LLM-based patch generation.
• PatchAgent[ 57] relies on the LLM alone for agentic fault
localization and patch synthesis, iteratively refining candidate
patches against the original PoC and developer test suite until the
repair budget is exhausted. It uses no dynamic analysis beyond
oracle replay validations.
• LoopRepair[ 56] augments the LLM-based repair loop with
symbolic execution: it runs KLEE on the original PoC’s execution
path to extract path constraints and taint traces that predict
patch locations before delegating patch synthesis to an LLM. We
configured it to use the same PoC-replay and test-suite oracle as
PatchAgent for validation.
• Codex[ 37] is a general-purpose coding agent. We configure it
with the original PoC, the developer test suite, and the project
codebase, and prompt it to perform agentic patch generation,
letting it autonomously decide how to explore the codebase and
produce a patch. Unlike Kumushi, it receives no pre-computed
fault-localization context and no fix-quality guidelines.
To ensure a fair comparison, all techniques use gpt-5.2-2025-12-
11 [38], the latest model while we ran the experiment, as the un-
derlying large language model backend.
Dataset.We evaluate on the 178-bug benchmark introduced by
Yu et al. [57], which spans 30 open-source C/C++ projects ranging
from 5k to 1M source lines of code (SLOC). Each bug ships with an
AddressSanitizer (ASan) crash report, a crash input, and a script
to run test suites. We group ASan crash labels into five classes
based on the ASan report label; Table 1 gives the class definitions.
Appendix B lists the full set of targets.
Table 1: Overview of the 178-bug benchmark.
Size (SLOC) #Proj. Spatial UAF NPD Num Other
Small (<50 k) 10 25 6 2 1 5
Medium (50 k–250 k) 13 40 6 5 4 7
Large (>250 k) 7 52 11 11 1 2
Total 30 117 23 18 6 14
Spatial: heap-, stack-, or global-buffer overflow, or heap out-of-bound read.
UAF: use-after-free, double-free, and invalid-free.
NPD: null-pointer dereference.
Num: divide-by-zero, integer overflow, and invalid bit-shift.
Other: sanitizer-unclassified crashes including unknown-read/write,
SEGV-on-unknown-address, and API-contract violations.
Prompt.The prompt for Kumushi’s patching agent includes the
root-cause analysis summary, the sanitizer report, the overall work-
flow, and the patching guidelines. Appendix C shows the complete
prompt.
Token usage.Table 2 reports per-bug mean and median token
consumption and estimated cost for each system. All four systems
use GPT-5.2 under their default repair budgets.
Table 2: Token usage and estimated cost (using GPT-5.2).
Mean Median
System Tokens Cost Tokens Cost
PatchAgent44,899 $0.16 43,255 $0.16
LoopRepair83,936 $0.30 50,046 $0.18
Codex239,848 $0.86 130,830 $0.47
Kumushi1,120,538 $4.02 517,992 $1.86
4.2 Root Cause Assessment Metric
To rigorously measure the performance of each tool and compare
the generated patches comprehensively, we introduce a two-tier
patch quality metric that combines the scalability of automated
oracles with the precision of human assessment.
Our two-tier metric design considers both evaluation precision
and scalability. Automated oracles such as PoC replay, test suites,
and fuzzing are cheap to run at scale but passing them does not
prove the underlying defect has been fixed [ 24], as a patch may
suppress the observed failure while leaving the root cause unad-
dressed. Human review can determine whether a patch fixes the
root cause, but applying it to every generated patch is prohibitively
expensive, taking 16 minutes per patch [47]. Our metric addresses
this tension by running automated oracles first to eliminate failed
patches, then forwarding only the surviving plausible patches to
human raters who assess whether the root cause has been resolved.
Since the oracle stage requires only the patch, the crash report,
and the program code base, our metric works for patches from any
repair system.
4.2.1 Tier 1: Dynamic Oracle Validation.Three oracles cover the
most common checks for validating LLM-generated patches [24]:
PoC replayconfirms that a reported crash no longer triggers. The
developer test suitechecks that documented behavior still holds.
6

Root-Cause-Driven Automated Vulnerability Repair Anonymous Submission to ACM CCS 2017, Due 19 May 2017, Dallas, Texas
AFL++ crash exploration, seeded from the PoC and run for 12 hours
on the project’s harness, detects patches that silence the reported
crash but leave the defect reachable through mutated inputs.
We categorize each generated patch into one of three outcomes
under progressively stricter dynamic oracles:
• No Patch: the patch fails to compile, or mitigate the original PoC
crash, or pass the developer’s existing test suite.
• Partial Patch: the patch passes compilation, PoC replay, and
the developer test suite, but does not suppress all variant crashes
discovered through 12 hours of AFL++ crash-exploration fuzzing
against the project’s own harness.
• Plausible Patch: the patch passes every dynamic check above,
including suppression of all AFL++-discovered variant crashes
within the 12-hour exploration budget.
4.2.2 Tier 2: Structured expert assessment.We forward patches
that pass all three dynamic oracles to human raters, who evaluate
each patch along two orthogonal axes and then, for Kumushi and
Codexpairs, apply a pairwise comparison rubric. The primary axis
captures whether the patch addresses the underlying defect:
• Root-Cause Fix: the patch directly repairs the underlying defect
identified from the crash report and PoC, eliminating the faulty
invariant at its source.
• Symptom Fix: the patch prevents or reduces the crash without
addressing the underlying defect, leaving related execution paths
potentially vulnerable.
The secondary axis is a boolean flag, has_unrelated_changes,
set whenever the diff contains modifications orthogonal to the root
cause. We track this flag because LLM-based tools occasionally edit
code beyond the scope of the root cause: reformatting, refactoring
adjacent functions, or making drive-by changes. These edits inflate
apparent productivity, add review burden, and risk regressions.
Surfacing such edits as a separate signal lets us distinguish a clean
root-cause fix from a correct fix bundled with unwanted changes.
We recruited eight raters (graduate students with research experi-
ence in software security and with more than 1 year of vulnerability
research experience). For each bug, three raters first reconstruct the
runtime environment in Docker to run the PoC, then identify the
root cause from the crash report and observed PoC behavior. Both
Kumushi andCodexgenerated patches against identical Docker
environments; only the patch-generation agent differed, controlling
for confounders in the reproduction setup. We consult the original
developer patch as a reference only and do not treat it as ground
truth, since upstream fixes are themselves frequently incomplete
or symptom-level [26, 51].
To mitigate source bias, we anonymizeCodexand Kumushi
outputs as tool_a and tool_b; the mapping is disclosed only after
labeling is complete. Labeling proceeds in independent rounds: each
rater labels every patch in isolation without access to the others’
judgments, and raters rotate across batches of bugs across rounds.
In each round, the rater assigns a primary label (root-cause fix or
symptom fix) and writes a justification that references the identified
root cause. After a dedicated scan for out-of-scope edits, the rater
sets the has_unrelated_changes flag. Raters record every flagged
edit in a shared spreadsheet, along with their rationales. Only after
both patches have been labeled in isolation raters apply the pairwise
comparison rubric. Correctness takes priority: a root-cause fix out-
ranks a symptom fix. When both patches repair the root cause, the
rater breaks ties first bysemantic precision, preferring the patch that
targets the faulty invariant without broadening scope. The number
of unrelated changes serves as the second tiebreaker. When nei-
ther patch reaches the root cause in our evaluation, we fall back to
comprehensiveness, preferring the patch that covers more affected
execution paths, edge cases, and related failure modes. Raters label
clear dominance cases directly, reserve the rubric for close calls,
and log all rationales for post-hoc audit. After three rounds, we use
majority vote to determine the final label and provide inter-rater
reliability statistics in Table 7.
Pairwise Comparison Rubric.The rubric is lexicographic on:
(1) Correctness.When one patch repairs the root cause and the
other only suppresses the reported crash, prefer the root-cause
fix. When both patches repair the root cause, prefer the one with
stricter semantic alignment to the defect, which is the patch that
targets the faulty invariant without broadening scope. Unrelated
changes weigh against a patch underhas_unrelated_changes;
when counts are close, raters exercise judgment rather than
apply a fixed threshold.
(2) Comprehensiveness.When neither patch repairs the root
cause, prefer the symptom fix that covers more of the relevant
execution paths, edge cases, and related failure modes stemming
from the same defect. Unrelated changes again weigh against
the patch under the same judgment-based weighting.
4.3 RQ1: Patching Capability
To answer RQ1, we run Kumushi against three baselines on 178
C/C++ vulnerabilities under three dynamic oracles: PoC replay,
developer test suite, and 12h of AFL++ variant-crash exploration
per bug. Table 3 reports the full outcome distribution. We classify
each patch as No Patch, Partial Patch, or Plausible Patch. Kumushi
substantially outperformsPatchAgentandLoopRepair, confirm-
ing the effectiveness of root-cause-driven localization. Kumushi
andCodex, however, are statistically indistinguishable under all
three oracles, revealing a ceiling on what oracle-based metrics can
discriminate at the frontier.
Table 3: Patch quality across 178 C/C++ vulnerabilities,
judged by dynamic oracles.
Tool No Patch Partial Patch Plausible Patch
PatchAgent13.5% (24) 14.6% (26) 71.9% (128)
LoopRepair97.2% (173) 0.6% (1) 2.2% (4)
Codex2.2% (4) 11.8% (21) 86.0% (153)
Kumushi1.7% (3) 12.9% (23) 85.4% (152)
Per-tool breakdown.PatchAgentproduces no patch on 13.5% of
bugs and only partial patches on another 14.6%, for a combined
failure rate of 28.1%. The partial-patch cases suppress the reported
crash but fail under AFL++ variants; the no-patch cases concentrate
on bugs where static context retrieval returned code irrelevant to
the defect.
LoopRepairfails on 97.2% of bugs. Its symbolic-execution com-
ponent (KLEE) compiled on 68 of the 178 targets and produced
7

Anonymous Submission to ACM CCS 2017, Due 19 May 2017, Dallas, Texas
Hulin Wang, Zion Leonahenahe Basque, Jie Hu, Ati Priya Bajaj, Yibo Liu, Samuel Zhu, Giorgi Kobakhia, Nikhil Chapre, Will Rosenberg, Siddharth Mishra, Aditya Maheshbhai
Gabani, Moritz Schloegel, Adam Doupé, Yan Shoshitaishvili, Ruoyu Wang, and Tiffany Bao
usable output on only 5, leavingLoopRepairwithout localization
input on the rest of the benchmark. Beyond this implementation
limitation, symbolic execution is more expensive than the dynamic
tracing Kumushi uses. Even on targets where KLEE succeeds, its
per-target cost cannot scale to the diversified multi-input tracing
Kumushiperforms across the AFL++ variant family.
98 Both
144
Kumushi Codex
Figure 2: Comparison of Kumushi andCodexon plausible
patch classification. The two systems overlap on 144 bugs;
Kumushi uniquely patches 8 andCodexuniquely patches 9.
Kumushi andCodexproduce nearly identical outcome distri-
butions under all three oracles (Table 3). Among the 161 bugs
where either tool produced a plausible patch, only 144 are shared:
Kumushi patches 8 bugs thatCodexmisses, andCodexpatches 9
that Kumushi misses (Figure 2). The aggregate counts are indistin-
guishable, but the tools fix different sets of bugs. The indistinguisha-
bility of Kumushi andCodexunder all three oracles is not evidence
of equivalent patch quality; it is evidence that oracle-based metrics
cannot separate frontier tools at this level. RQ2 applies tier-2 human
assessment to examine what the oracles cannot see.
4.4 RQ2: Patch Comprehensiveness
To answer RQ2, we examine whether Kumushi andCodexdiffer
in the quality of the plausible patches they produce, a dimension
that the three oracle metrics in RQ1 cannot capture. Three raters
independently label all 305 plausible patches (152 from Kumushi
and 153 fromCodex) along two axes following the tier-2 proto-
col in Section 4.2.2: a root-cause vs. symptom judgment and a
boolean has_unrelated_changes flag. We then characterize the
repair strategies each tool employs through open coding, yield-
ing eight root-cause fix strategies and nine symptom-fix failure
strategies.
Tier-2 labeling reveals that Kumushi produces more root-cause
fixes and fewer symptom fixes thanCodex, and that the two tools
diverge in the kind of repair they produce when they fall short of
the root cause.
Aggregated results.Across 305 labeled patches, Kumushi produces
more root-cause fixes thanCodex(84.9% vs. 77.8%; 129 vs. 119,
Table 4), indicating that Kumushi generates more comprehensive
and correct patches thanCodexoverall. The root-cause fix gap
falls short of 𝑝< 0.05at this sample size; the unpaired aggregate
comparison has limited statistical power, and the per-bug paired
analysis in RQ3 is better suited to detect the difference.
Kumushi also produces more patches containing unrelated edits
thanCodex(28.3% vs. 21.6%; 43 vs. 33, Table 4). This higher rate
does not signal lower patch quality from Kumushi. Within each
tool, the unrelated-edit rate is consistent across root-cause fixes
and symptom fixes (29.5% vs. 21.7% for Kumushi; 22.7% vs. 17.6%
forCodex), with neither within-tool difference reaching statistical
significance (𝑝> 0.05for both). Unrelated edits therefore reflect a
stable property of each tool’s editing behavior rather than a signal of
patch incorrectness, and the higher unrelated-edit rate in Kumushi
does not account for its root-cause fix advantage overCodex.
Table 4: Patch quality and unrelated change rate per tool.
Tool Patch Quality Count With
Unrelated
Without
Unrelated
Codex
root-cause fix 119 27 92
symptom fix 34 6 28
total 153 33 120
Kumushi
root-cause fix 129 38 91
symptom fix 23 5 18
total 152 43 109
Repair strategy analysis.We next group each patch by its primary
repair strategy through open coding, yielding eight root-cause
fix strategies and nine symptom-fix strategies (full definitions in
Appendix A). Table 5 and Table 6 present the strategy name and
per-tool counts for root-cause fixes and symptom fixes, respectively.
Among each tool’s root-cause fixes (Table 5), the per-tool cate-
gory distributions are broadly similar: both lean on bound checks
(35% forCodex, 33% for Kumushi) and API-contract enforcement.
The one notable difference is invariant validation, where Kumushi
produces three times as many fixes asCodex(12 vs. 4). This is
consistent with Kumushi’s diversified fault localization more often
surfacing the upstream producer where the invalid input enters the
system, rather than anchoring at the downstream consumer where
the crash surfaces.
Table 5: Root-cause fix strategies (𝑛=248after audit).
CategoryCodex KumushiTotal
Bound check 42 43 85
API contract 21 21 42
Size arithmetic 20 19 39
Control-flow fix 13 12 25
Ownership repair 11 12 23
Invariant validation 4 12 16
State sync 7 7 14
Type representation 1 3 4
Total 119 129 248
Among symptom fixes (Table 6), the two tools diverge more
sharply.Codexproduces nearly twice as many crash-site guards
as Kumushi (13 vs. 7) and is alone in producing trigger blocks (3
8

Root-Cause-Driven Automated Vulnerability Repair Anonymous Submission to ACM CCS 2017, Due 19 May 2017, Dallas, Texas
vs. 0); both are narrow patches that silence the observed failure
without enforcing the general invariant. Kumushi’s symptom fixes
spread more evenly across categories with no single failure mode
dominating, suggesting that whenKumushi does not reach the root
cause it does so for more varied reasons rather than consistently
drifting to the crash site.
Together, the aggregate gap and the categorical asymmetries
agree. Kumushi more often repairs the defect at its source, while
Codexmore often patches at the crash site. RQ3 confirms this
difference with a paired within-bug comparison and illustrates its
qualitative character through case studies.
Table 6: Symptom-fix strategies (𝑛=57after audit).
CategoryCodex KumushiTotal
Crash-site guard 13 7 20
Downstream guard 4 5 9
Value masking 4 4 8
Corrupt-state tolerance 4 4 8
Trigger block 3 0 3
Incomplete coverage 2 1 3
Lifetime masking 2 1 3
Wrong location 1 1 2
Ineffective guard 1 0 1
Total 34 23 57
Inter-rater reliability.For each label we report three statistics in
Table 7: Fleiss’s 𝜅 [12], the raw observed agreement (mean of the
three pairwise rater-agreement rates), and the prevalence of the
positive class. We compute the patch quality and unrelated-change
labels over the 161-bug union and the pairwise winner label over
the 144-bug intersection where both tools produced a plausible
patch. We treat abstentions as their own category.
Onpatch quality, raw agreement is0 .81/0.86(Codex/ Kumushi)
at a positive-class (root-cause fix) prevalence of0 .75/0.83, giving
𝜅= 0.57/0.62. The relatively low 𝜅 reflects prevalence compres-
sion rather than rater disagreement [ 7]: when the positive class
dominates, chance agreement is high and 𝜅 deflates even when
raters largely agree. The root-cause vs. symptom-fix label, assigned
after raters first identified each bug’s root cause, is reproducible
across rounds. Onunrelated change, raw agreement is0.84/0.74at
a near-balanced prevalence of0 .25/0.32, giving 𝜅= 0.64/0.47. The
moderate 𝜅 for Kumushi unrelated changes reflects the inherent
subjectivity in judging whether an edit is within or outside the
scope of the defect, rather than systematic rater disagreement.
Manual labeling surfaces two classes of differences the oracles
in RQ1 could not detect: an aggregate gap on root-cause-fix and
unrelated-edit rates, and categorical asymmetries in the kinds of
repairs each tool produces. We characterize each below. RQ3 ad-
dresses whether the aggregate gap is statistically significant, using a
paired within-bug comparison that has more statistical power than
comparing the total counts at this sample size. RQ2 surfaces what
differs between the two tools. Whether those differences translate
into a per-bug preference, and which tool that preference favors, is
the question RQ3 answers.
3968 Same
37
Kumushi Codex
Figure 3: Human preference between Kumushi andCodex
plausible patches. Raters prefer Kumushi for 68 patches and
Codexfor 39, with 37 rated equivalent.
Table 7: Inter-rater agreement on RQ2 per-patch labels and
RQ3 pairwise winner label.Prev. (+): positive-class prevalence
among non-missing ratings.Agree: mean pairwise observed
agreement.𝜅: Fleiss’s chance-corrected agreement.
Label (positive class) Tool Prev. (+) Agree𝜅
Patch quality (root cause) Codex0.75 0.81 0.57
Kumushi0.83 0.86 0.62
Unrelated change (True) Codex0.25 0.84 0.64
Kumushi0.32 0.74 0.47
Winner (pairwise) — — 0.68 0.54
4.5 RQ3: Pairwise Patch Quality Analysis
To answer RQ3, three raters apply the pairwise comparison rubric
(Section 4.2.2) to the 144-bug intersection where both Kumushi
andCodexproduced a plausible patch, ranking correctness first
and comprehensiveness second. This paired design removes bug-
difficulty noise and gives the test enough statistical power to con-
firm the quality gap that RQ2 could only suggest directionally.
Figure 3 summarizes the outcome: Kumushi is preferred on 68
(47%),Codexon 39 (27%), and the two are tied on 37 (26%). Among
the 107 decisive bugs where raters reached a clear preference,
Kumushi wins 63.6% of comparisons; a sign test gives 𝑝= 0.0065
with a 95% confidence interval of (54.4%, 72.7%) for Kumushi’s
win-rate, confirming that the directional gap observed in RQ2 is sta-
tistically significant after controlling for bug difficulty. Inter-rater
agreement on the winner label is moderate (𝜅= 0.54, Table 7), so
the pairwise judgment is reproducible across raters and not driven
by a single rater’s call.
In the majority of bugs where Kumushi is preferred, its diversi-
fied fault localization surfaces the producer-side defect alongside
the ASan-named crash site, allowing Kumushi to repair the invari-
ant rather than guard the symptom; Cases A and B illustrate this
pattern. Case C illustrates a different dynamic: aCodex-wins case
in which the decisive evidence emerged only after synthesizing aux-
iliary analysis code at repair time, a capability outside Kumushi’s
design.
9

Anonymous Submission to ACM CCS 2017, Due 19 May 2017, Dallas, Texas
Hulin Wang, Zion Leonahenahe Basque, Jie Hu, Ati Priya Bajaj, Yibo Liu, Samuel Zhu, Giorgi Kobakhia, Nikhil Chapre, Will Rosenberg, Siddharth Mishra, Aditya Maheshbhai
Gabani, Moritz Schloegel, Adam Doupé, Yan Shoshitaishvili, Ruoyu Wang, and Tiffany Bao
4.5.1 Case A: libxml2 Cursor Underflow Across Halt Boundary.We
use Case A as an example to show thatCodexmisses the root cause
location because of missing dynamic information.
The bad state originates inxmlHaltParser at parserInternals
.c:289; on a failed buffer grow, it assigns the parser cursor to a
one-byte global, ctxt->input->cur = BAD_CAST"" , leaving base
== cur == end on a one-byte string. The mutation that vio-
lates the post-halt invariant occurs in xmlParseNCNameComplex
(parser.c:3434); when its lookahead returns c == 0 after a halt,
it computes ctxt->input->cur -= l with l > cur - base , un-
derflowing below the global. ASan reports the subsequent read at
xmlParseQName (parser.c:8867), where the caller dereferences
the underflowed cursor while testing for ‘:’. The producer site,
the underflow site, and the crash site each sit in a distinct function.
1// Producer (parserInternals.c:289):
2// xmlHaltParser leaves cur on a 1-byte
3// global -- base == cur == end
4ctxt->input->cur = BAD_CAST"";
5ctxt->input->base = ctxt->input->cur;
6ctxt->input->end = ctxt->input->cur;
7
8// Underflow site (xmlParseNCNameComplex):
9if(c == 0) {
10
11// Codex (SF-4, corrupt_state_tolerance):
12+if(ctxt->instate == XML_PARSER_EOF)
13+return(NULL);
14ctxt->input->cur -= l;
15GROW;
16+if(ctxt->instate == XML_PARSER_EOF) {
17+ ctxt->input->cur = ctxt->input->base;
18+return(NULL);
19+ }
20
21// Kumushi (RCF-1, bound_check):
22+ ptrdiff_t back = l;
23+if(ctxt->input->cur
24+ - ctxt->input->base < back)
25+ back = ctxt->input->cur
26+ - ctxt->input->base;
27+ ctxt->input->cur -= back;
28GROW;
29if(ctxt->instate == XML_PARSER_EOF)
30return(NULL);
31ctxt->input->cur += back;
32c = CUR_CHAR(l);
33}
Listing 1: Both tools patch parser.c:3434; the asymmetry
is in mechanism.Codexguards the EOF-state transitions
around the underflow site (SF-4 corrupt_state_tolerance);
Kumushi clamps the cursor arithmetic so the subtraction
cannot underflow (RCF-1bound_check).
Kumushi’s Stage-2 ranking surfaced xmlHaltParser as a top
FoI on the object-origin tag, with the line ctxt->input->cur =
BAD_CAST"" pre-loaded into first-turn context. With the post-halt
cursor state visible, the agent recognized the invariant cur >=
base and patched the underflow site by clamping the subtraction
at the cursor extent with back = min(l, cur - base) (RCF-1
bound_check, Listing 1). The clamp enforces cur >= base at the
subtraction site, so the underflow cannot occur whether or not the
parser’sinstatehas transitioned to EOF.
Codex’s exploration anchored at the ASan-named consumer
and walked the call chain throughxmlParseNCName into xmlParse
NCNameComplex.Codexgrep’d the codebase for input->cur -= ,
found one occurrence at parser.c:3434, and read that as proof
the bug lived only there; it never opened xmlHaltParser, even
though the ASan report named the producer file as hosting the
underflowed buffer. Without the halt-state fact,Codexframed the
bug as an EOF-transition flaw and patched the same line with
instate guards around GROW, including a post-GROW reset of cur
to base that re-aligns the cursor after the corrupt state has already
been created rather than preventing its creation (SF-4 corrupt_
state_tolerance, Listing 1). The guards fire only when instate
has reached EOF, so any halt path that reaches the subtraction
before that transition does so unguarded.
Case A shows that two agents can patch the same line under
different invariants, with Stage-2 evidence deciding which invariant
gets encoded. This sharpens the localization bottleneck named in
observation (1) of section 2.3. Without dynamic information about
the upstream producer, theCodexreaches the patch site but cannot
recover the invariant that the producer violates.
4.5.2 Case B: libsndfile IMA-ADPCM Block Decode.We use Case B
as an example to show thatCodexreaches the upstream invariant
in its reasoning, then drops it after a context-expansion step pulls
in irrelevant code.
The defect is a parser-boundary trust violation in the WAV/W64
IMA-ADPCM reader. The nibble-unpack loop in wavlike_ima_
decode_block assumes its payload is an exact multiple of4 ×
channels bytes (eight nibbles per channel per iteration). A mal-
formed fmt chunk advertising an inconsistent block-alignment
makes the cached block geometry, sample count, and decode loop
disagree, so the loop walks past the sample buffer. The producer
is ima_reader_init, whose WAV/W64 switch arm already vali-
dates samplesperblock against a derived count but does not check
that blocksize - 4 * channels is a positive multiple of 4 *
channels.
1// Nibble-unpack: layout invariant
2while(blockindx < blocksize) {
3for(chan ...) {
4for(k = 0; k < 4; k++)
5samples[indx] = ...; // OOB
6} }
7
8// Codex (SF-1, crash_site_guard):
9+if(indxstart >= total)break;
10for(chan ...) {
11for(k = 0; k < 4; k++)
12+if(indx < total)
13samples[indx] = ...;
14}
15
16// Kumushi (RCF-6, invariant_validation):
17+if(blockalign < 4 * channels ||
18+ (blockalign - 4 * channels)
19+ % (4 * channels) != 0)
20+returnSFE_WAV_BAD_BLOCKALIGN;
Listing 2:Codexstates the upstream invariant but does
not apply it, guarding writes at the crash site instead (SF-
1 crash_site_guard). Kumushi encodes the same invariant
at the producer (RCF-6invariant_validation).
Kumushi’s Stage-2 ranking placed ima_reader_init at the top
of the FoI list, above the ASan-namedwavlike_ima_decode_block,
10

Root-Cause-Driven Automated Vulnerability Repair Anonymous Submission to ACM CCS 2017, Due 19 May 2017, Dallas, Texas
contributed by CodeQL’s intra-procedural dataflow tag and the
dynamic call trace; the surrounding switch arm and the existing
samplesperblock guard were pre-loaded into first-turn context.
The agent extended the same arm with the missing divisibility pre-
condition, returning SFE_WAV_BAD_BLOCKALIGN when the input vi-
olates the nibble-layout invariant (RCF-6 invariant_validation,
Listing 2).
Codex’s trace identifies the same invariant and then drops it.
After reading the decode loop and the init function,Codexstated
the upstream check explicitly, that (blockalign - 4*channels)
should be divisible by (4*channels). After a call-graph sweep on
decode_block broadened context with the encoder, the read-block
helper, and the seek paths,Codexdropped the divisibility precon-
dition in favor of in-loop bounds clamping. Only the floor check
blocksize < 4 * channels survived into the emitted patch, which
guards each indexed write at the consumer site rather than reject-
ing the malformed geometry upstream (SF-1 crash_site_guard,
Listing 2).
Case B instantiates observation (2) of section 2.3. When unfiltered
context expands during exploration, even a correctly identified up-
stream check can be displaced by off-path code patterns.Kumushi’s
Stage-2 ranking places the upstream initializer at the agent’s first
read, so the call-graph drift that displaces the right invariant in
Codex’s exploration never has the chance to occur.
4.5.3 Case C: mruby Heap Buffer Overflow.We use Case C as an
example to show that a defect that lies outsideKumushi’s reach. The
root cause resides in the compiler’s bytecode generator, separated
from the crash by thousands of frames in the call graph. This places
it outside the scope of Kumushi’s static analysis and renders it
indistinguishable from normal behavior under dynamic analysis.
The proof of concept ~(:regex or 1*1) triggers a heap-buffer-
overflow at vm.c:1120, where the VM indexes a one-entry literal
pool with b = 1 . The crash site, however, is not the defect site.
The underlying bug is in gen_uniop (codegen.c:1137), the only
unary peephole rewrite path that lacks a no_peephole() guard.
As Listing 3 shows, the failing case rewrites OP_LOADI_1 (2 bytes)
into OP_LOADINEG (3 bytes) after an OP_JMPIF target has already
been patched. The jump target therefore remains at the old byte
offset and lands in the middle of the rewritten instruction, so the
VM decodes operand byte 0x02 as a fresh opcode and eventually
reads past the literal pool.
1before rewrite:
22:OP_JMPIFr3, +8 // target = 10
38:OP_LOADI_1r3 // 2 bytes
410: <next instruction>
5after gen_uniop folds ~1 to -2:
62:OP_JMPIFr3, +8 // still targets 10
78:OP_LOADINEGr3, 2 // 3 bytes
810: 0x02 // jump lands in operand byte
Listing 3: Bytecode drift after peephole rewrite.
gen_uniop runs during compilation, hundreds of frames before
vm.c:1120, and the bytecode buffer that links compiler to VM
is opaque to static dataflow. Kumushi’s evidence sources score
candidates by uniqueness in the trace and connectivity through
dataflow tags, but no dataflow edge leads back to the rewriter
1static mrb_bool
2gen_uniop(codegen_scope*s,mrb_symsym,uint16_tdst)
3{
4if(no_peephole(s))return FALSE;
5structmrb_insn_data data =mrb_last_insn(s);
6...
7}
Listing 4: Minimal guard for unary peephole folding.
and bytecode-generation routines appear throughout the trace, so
neither signal surfaces it. Kumushi therefore cannot localize the
root cause and emits a patch that validates the decoded literal-pool
index b before the VM reads pool[b] (SF-1 crash_site_guard).
The patch suppresses the observed crash but does not repair the
violated compiler invariant.
TheCodexrun, by contrast, generated a bytecode disassembler
during repair, exposed the one-byte drift in Listing 3, and traced
the problem back to a missing no_peephole() condition on the
unary folding path. Its patch inserts the guard at the caller-side fold
site in codegen.c, blocking the same unguarded fold path as the
ground-truth fix, which places the check inside gen_uniop (RCF-4
control_flow_fix, Listing 4).
Case C demonstrates that crash-anchored ranking misses de-
fects whose decisive evidence emerges only at repair time.Codex
reached the rewriter because a general-purpose coding agent can
construct a custom program-analysis tool when its reasoning re-
quires one. Kumushi’s current Stage-2 evidence sources have no
edge to follow back across the encoded-bytecode boundary, so this
class of bugs is unreachable by the present pipeline.
Takeaway.In summary, the three cases identify the factors that
drive the quality gap. Kumushi’s evidence-weighted ranking sur-
faces upstream producers that the ASan stack does not name (Case A)
and places them at the agent’s first read, preempting the call-graph
drift that displaces the right invariant duringCodex’s exploration
(Case B). Both moves push patches toward root-cause categories
(RCF-1 bound_check, RCF-6 invariant_validation) rather than
crash-site or downstream guards. Root-cause-anchored patching’s
strength comes from grounding the agent in evidence the LLM can-
not recover by reading code alone. Its limitation appears when the
decisive evidence sits behind a boundary that no static or dynamic
source can cross (Case C), in which case a general-purpose agent
that synthesizes its own analysis tool can outperform it.
5 Related Work
Automated Program Repair.Automated program repair (APR)
has been extensively studied for generating patches that transform
defective or vulnerable programs into correct or secure ones. Exist-
ing APR techniques can be broadly categorized into search-based,
template-based, semantic-based, and learning-based approaches.
Search-based repair.Search-based approaches formulate patch
generation as a search problem over a space of program vari-
ants [17, 21]. GenProg [21], for example, generates candidate vari-
ants through mutation and crossover and evaluates them against
test suites. Fix2Fit [17] further incorporates fuzzing to refine the
search space and guide the generation of crash-avoiding patches.
11

Anonymous Submission to ACM CCS 2017, Due 19 May 2017, Dallas, Texas
Hulin Wang, Zion Leonahenahe Basque, Jie Hu, Ati Priya Bajaj, Yibo Liu, Samuel Zhu, Giorgi Kobakhia, Nikhil Chapre, Will Rosenberg, Siddharth Mishra, Aditya Maheshbhai
Gabani, Moritz Schloegel, Adam Doupé, Yan Shoshitaishvili, Ruoyu Wang, and Tiffany Bao
Template-based repair.Template-based approaches rely on pre-
defined patch patterns or repair templates to produce candidate
fixes [15, 29, 33, 46, 52]. BovInspector [15] uses safe API templates
to repair buffer-overflow vulnerabilities. RegexScalpel [33] employs
regular-expression templates to mitigate ReDoS vulnerabilities.
VFix [52] uses two sets of repair templates to address null-pointer-
dereference vulnerabilities.
Semantic-based repair.Semantic-based approaches exploit pro-
gram semantics, vulnerability properties, or inferred constraints to
synthesize patches [16, 18, 23, 25, 44, 48, 60]. SAVER [23] constructs
constraints from variable states and control-/data-flow graphs to
generate repairs. ExtractFix [18] derives crash-free constraints and
uses them to synthesize candidate patches. VulnFix [60] infers pro-
gram invariants and leverages them to guide vulnerability repair.
Learning-based repair.More recently, learning-based APR tech-
niques have used neural models and large language models to
translate vulnerable code into repaired code [8, 13, 14, 22, 62]. Vul-
Repair [14], for instance, fine-tunes CodeT5 [49] for vulnerability
repair. Other work has explored prompting strategies that improve
the ability of LLMs to generate security patches [30, 34, 42].
Root Cause Analysis.Root cause analysis aims to identify the
program locations and execution conditions responsible for a fail-
ure or vulnerability. Prior work has shown that combining static
and dynamic analysis can improve the localization of root causes
and provide useful guidance for patch generation [ 52]. Existing
techniques diagnose bugs and vulnerabilities using statistical, trace-
based, and semantic information.
Statistical root cause analysis.Statistical techniques rank candi-
date program locations according to their correlation with failing
executions [1, 6, 28, 41]. AURORA [6] compares traces from crash-
ing and non-crashing inputs and uses statistical analysis to identify
likely root-cause locations. Such techniques are effective when suf-
ficient execution evidence is available, but their accuracy depends
on the quality and diversity of the collected traces and may degrade
when failures are triggered by complex semantic conditions.
Semantic root cause analysis.Semantic techniques use program
reasoning to explain how a proof-of-concept input reaches a vul-
nerable state [53, 54]. ARCUS [54], for example, builds on symbolic
execution with angr [45] to trace a vulnerability and identify its root
cause. Compared with statistical techniques, semantic approaches
can provide more precise explanations of vulnerability-triggering
conditions, but they often depend on heavyweight program analy-
ses and may face scalability challenges on complex programs.
6 Discussion
Oracle-Based Evaluation Is No Longer Sufficient.The auto-
mated vulnerability repair community has long acknowledged that
replay-based oracles are an imperfect proxy for patch quality[24].
A patch may suppress the observed failure while leaving the un-
derlying defect intact. The community recognized this limitation
but tolerated it. When the field’s best tools produced meaningfully
different oracle-passing rates, oracle-based evaluation could still
discriminate between them.PatchAgent,LoopRepair, and earlier
prompt-based approaches produce meaningfully different plausible
patch rates (71.9%, 2.2%, respectively), and oracle metrics alone are
sufficient to rank them.
We find that oracle-based evaluation no longer separates the
latest LLM-based agents. Our evaluation shows that Kumushi, a
specialized root-cause-driven agent, andCodex, a general-purpose
coding agent, are statistically indistinguishable under all three ora-
cles, yet expert assessment reveals a significant quality gap in favor
of Kumushi (𝑝= 0.0065). This is not an artifact of our benchmark
or our tools. It reflects a structural shift in agent capability. General-
purpose coding agents now reliably produce oracle-passing patches
across a wide range of vulnerability types, saturating the metric
the community has long relied on.
The implication for the APR community is direct. As coding
agents continue to improve, oracle-passing rate will fail to separate
tools that produce root-cause fixes from those that produce symp-
tom patches. Therefore, they require evaluation methods capable
of assessingwhata patch fixes, notwhetherthe observed crash is
suppressed. The two-tier metric introduced in this work is one step
in that direction, pairing automated oracles with structured expert
assessment of patch comprehensiveness. We hope future work can
build automated proxies for expert judgment that can flag symptom
patches before they are counted as successes.
Limitations of Crash-Anchored Localization. Kumushi’s root-
cause-driven design assumes the defect site is reachable from the
crash site through static or dynamic evidence. This assumption
holds for the majority of bugs in our benchmark, where the pro-
ducer, the underflow site, and the crash site are connected by
dataflow edges or execution traces that Stage 1 can collect and
Stage 2 can rank. Case C shows where it breaks down. When the
defect site is separated from the crash by an opaque boundary, such
as an encoded bytecode buffer or an inter-process channel, no static
dataflow edge and no dynamic trace leads back to it. Evidence-
weighted ranking cannot surface what no evidence source can
reach.
This is a structural limit of crash-anchored localization, not an im-
plementation gap specific to Kumushi. Any approach that grounds
localization in crash-site evidence will face the same issue. Case C
also illustrates what can fill the gap. A general-purpose agent that
synthesizes its own analysis tools at repair time can cross bound-
aries that pre-computed evidence sources cannot. The tradeoff is
that such agents operate without the focused context that evidence-
weighted ranking provides, making them more susceptible to the
drift pattern that motivatesKumushi’s design in the first place.
Two additional scope constraints bound the current prototype.
First, the quality of Stage 1’s candidate pool depends on how many
distinct crash paths the fuzzer finds within the time budget. Bugs
with narrow trigger conditions may not diversify enough to expose
root-cause-correlated functions beyond the crash stack. Second, the
pipeline currently assumes sanitizer instrumentation and fuzzing
infrastructure, which limits direct applicability to languages and
ecosystems where such tooling is unavailable. We leave extending
Kumushito them to future work.
Toward Automated Patch Quality Validation.Manual expert
assessment, as applied in our tier-2 evaluation, does not scale to the
patch volumes that LLM-based repair pipelines now produce. Our
evaluation required approximately 16 minutes per patch [47], and
even with eight raters working in parallel, coverage was bounded
12

Root-Cause-Driven Automated Vulnerability Repair Anonymous Submission to ACM CCS 2017, Due 19 May 2017, Dallas, Texas
by the 144-bug intersection where both tools produced a plausi-
ble patch. As repair systems improve and benchmarks grow, this
bottleneck will become more acute.
Our taxonomy of symptom-fix strategies in Table 6 suggests
a path forward. The nine failure modes we identify are not arbi-
trary. Crash-site guards, downstream guards, and trigger blocks
share a structural signature in which the patch modifies code at
or near the ASan-reported crash site without touching any func-
tion that the evidence-weighted ranking would have flagged as a
root-cause candidate. Value masking and corrupt-state tolerance
leave the producer intact while suppressing its observable effect.
These structural fingerprints are in principle detectable without
human review. An automated checker can compare the patch’s edit
locations against the FoI ranking, determine whether the modified
code touches a producer or only a consumer, and flag patches whose
diffs are confined to the crash stack. We hope future work uses this
taxonomy as a foundation for automated validators that can triage
symptom patches before they reach a human reviewer, closing the
scalability gap that tier-2 assessment currently cannot bridge.
7 Conclusion
This work introduces Kumushi, a vulnerability patching system
that addresses two limitations of existing LLM-based tools: (1) static-
only fault localization that fails to pinpoint root causes, and (2)
unfiltered context that drives agents toward crash-site suppres-
sion instead of root-cause repair. In particular, Kumushi uses two
innovative techniques: diversified fault localization and evidence-
weighted context ranking. Based on our evaluation of patching
178 C/C++ vulnerabilities, Kumushi generates plausible patches for
over 90% of vulnerabilities under the replay-based oracle and pro-
duces more high-quality patches than commercial general-purpose
coding agents under blind human expert assessment, which outper-
forms the state-of-the-art automatic root cause repair techniques
in both academia and industry.
