record_id: arxiv:2502.18652
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2502.18652
fetched_title: INDEPENDENT MOBILITY GPT (IDM-GPT): A SELF -SUPERVISED MULTI-AGENT LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL FRAMEWORK FOR CUSTOMIZED TRAFFIC MOBILITY ANALYSIS USING MACHINE LEARNING MODELS
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:11Z

INDEPENDENT MOBILITY GPT (IDM-GPT): A
SELF -SUPERVISED MULTI-AGENT LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL
FRAMEWORK FOR CUSTOMIZED TRAFFIC MOBILITY ANALYSIS
USING MACHINE LEARNING MODELS
A PREPRINT
Fengze Yang
Department of Civil & Environmental Engineering
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, 84112
fred.yang@utah.edu
Xiaoyue Cathy Liu
Department of Civil & Environmental Engineering
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, 84112
cathy.liu@utah.edu
Lingjiu Lu
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
University of Washington,
Seattle, W A, 98195
lingjiu@uw.edu
Bingzhang Wang
Department of Civil and Environmental Engineering
University of Washington,
Seattle, W A, 98195
bzwang@uw.edu
Chenxi (Dylan) Liu∗
Department of Civil & Environmental Engineering
University of Utah
Salt Lake City, 84112
chenxi.liu@utah.edu
March 5, 2025
ABSTRACT
With the urbanization process, an increasing number of sensors are being deployed in transportation
systems, leading to an explosion of big data. To harness the power of this vast transportation
data, various machine learning (ML) and artificial intelligence (AI) methods have been introduced
to address numerous transportation challenges. However, these methods often require significant
investment in data collection, processing, storage, and the employment of professionals with expertise
in transportation and ML. Additionally, privacy issues are a major concern when processing data
for real-world traffic control and management. To address these challenges, the research team
proposes an innovative Multi-agent framework named Independent Mobility GPT (IDM-GPT) based
on large language models (LLMs) for customized traffic analysis, management suggestions, and
privacy preservation. IDM-GPT efficiently connects users, transportation databases, and ML models
economically. IDM-GPT trains, customizes, and applies various LLM-based AI agents for multiple
functions, including user query comprehension, prompts optimization, data analysis, model selection,
and performance evaluation and enhancement. With IDM-GPT, users without any background in
transportation or ML can efficiently and intuitively obtain data analysis and customized suggestions
in near real-time based on their questions. Experimental results demonstrate that IDM-GPT delivers
satisfactory performance across multiple traffic-related tasks, providing comprehensive and actionable
insights that support effective traffic management and urban mobility improvement.
∗Corresponding author.
arXiv:2502.18652v2 [cs.AI] 3 Mar 2025

Independent Mobility GPT (IDM-GPT) A PREPRINT
Keywords Large Language Models· Traffic Data Analysis· Urban Mobility· Machine Learning
1 Introduction
Urbanization drives economic growth, enhances access to services and opportunities, and fosters cultural and social
development in concentrated areas. However, it also challenges the equilibrium between infrastructure supply and travel
demands, resulting in mobility issues that can slow economic activity due to increased congestion, longer commute
times, and higher pollution levels. A report published by the United States Department of Transportation (USDOT)
[1] reveals that the vehicle miles of travel grew 2.1% faster than the public road and street mileage between 2010 and
2022, even when accounting for the effects of the pandemic. Concurrently, the annual hours of delay per commuter in
"very large" cities rose by 5 hours from 2010 to 2019, prior to the pandemic. These factors collectively diminish living
quality and could lead to resident dissatisfaction [2, 3, 4]. Therefore, it is significant for transportation agencies like
DOTs to address mobility challenges within current transportation systems and enhance network resilience. To achieve
this goal, they need to identify the current traffic demands and road system bottlenecks by deploying an extensive array
of sensors and devices to collect data, including loop detectors, surveillance cameras, radar or LiDAR sensors, and GPS
devices [5, 6]. These sources generate substantial quantities of data, such as speed, traffic volumes, and density [ 7],
providing transportation agencies with a detailed understanding of network mobility and supporting the development of
more accurate and reliable traffic models. Nevertheless, the surge of big data also presents great opportunities as well as
significant challenges, such as processing efficiency, data privacy and security issues, as well as the increased labor
costs associated with implementing advanced technologies like Machine Learning (ML) applications.
Leveraging the vast influx of big data, numerous ML techniques have been integrated into transportation systems to
capture the temporal-spatial dependencies of traffic data, thereby addressing various mobility challenges. To efficiently
harness the potential of traffic data, ML models such as statistical models and deep learning (DL) models offer a
broad spectrum of analytical techniques for traffic agencies. Among these, DL models like neural networks (NN)
are particularly beneficial for traffic data analysis due to their capabilities in complex pattern recognition, feature
extraction, and capturing non-linear spatio-temporal correlations [8, 9, 10, 11, 12]. For example, Convolutional Neural
Networks (CNNs) are well-suited for spatial data analysis and can proficiently process data in grid formats such as
images or road network grids; while Recurrent Neural Networks (RNNs), especially Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM)
networks, excel at capturing temporal dependencies over sequences of data. Although these state-of-the-art ML models
significantly enhance the utility of traffic data, their direct implementation introduces several challenges:
• Time Consumption and Efficiency: Traffic agency analysts take a non-real-time to fetch, process, and
analyze large volumes of traffic data. This delay can hinder timely decision-making and real-time response to
changing traffic conditions.
• Scalability and Error Management: Manual analysis struggles to scale effectively with the vast amounts of
traffic data generated by modern sensor deployments. Data overload can lead to potential oversights and errors
due to fatigue.
• Costs and Resource Requirements: Employing human analysts involves significant expenses, including
salaries, ongoing training, and infrastructure for manual data collection and processing.
• Data Privacy: Data privacy is a critical issue when human analysts manually process traffic data in ML/AI
implementations. The manual handling of sensitive information, such as travel routes, timestamps, and
personal vehicle data, increases the risk of data breaches or non-compliance with privacy regulations [13].
Nevertheless, the advent of AI agents empowered by large language models (LLMs) mitigates the challenges caused by
human analysts applying traditional ML models or neural networks (NNs) [14]. LLMs, such as OpenAI’s GPT series,
are transformer models that excel in understanding and generating human-like text by learning from vast amounts of
textual data, making them highly effective for natural language processing tasks [15]. In the context of evaluating traffic
patterns, AI agents utilize the capabilities of LLMs to function as intermediaries that simplify the interaction with
complex ML models, offering intuitive natural language interfaces. These interfaces, brought by LLMs, facilitate ease
of use for non-expert users, enabling them to conduct complex queries and interpretations more efficiently, thereby
reducing the need for specialized ML expertise.
Moreover, by integrating various ML models with the natural language processing abilities of LLMs, AI agents alleviate
the need for traffic agencies to possess extensive ML knowledge or undergo specific training [ 16], thus reducing
additional labor costs associated with implementing ML models and improving operational efficiency. Additionally,
LLM agents contribute to minimizing the risk of data leakage by acting as secure mediators in the processing of sensitive
personal travel data, obviating direct human access. Due to their capacity to analyze extensive volumes of unstructured
data from diverse sources [17] or to query structured data from databases [ 18, 19], LLM agents efficiently identify
2

Independent Mobility GPT (IDM-GPT) A PREPRINT
trends and anomalies, reducing the necessity for manual intervention. By implementing advanced encryption and
anonymization techniques during data processing, LLM agents ensure that the underlying data’s privacy is preserved
while yielding valuable insights.
Although LLM agents show promise for addressing challenges in traffic management, a gap remains between theoretical
benefits and practical applications. LLMs require a chain-of-thought (CoT) strategy to break down complex questions
for better results [20]. For larger tasks like mobility analysis, a single agent struggles to fully address the user queries.
Effective solutions require multiple LLM agents collaborating in a structured framework, with effective prompting to
improve reasoning and decision-making [21]. Moreover, LLMs often lack domain-specific knowledge in transportation
and ML model implementation [ 22], limiting their effectiveness in real-world scenarios. Therefore, developing a
multi-agent LLM framework integrated with ML models tailored for transportation analysis is essential to bridge this
gap and enhance their utility for traffic agencies handling complex problems.
Therefore, this paper introduces Independent Mobility GPT (IDM-GPT), a novel multi-agent LLM framework designed
to independently support the process of mobility analysis efficiently by utilizing ML models empowered by LLMs. This
framework leverages LLMs as an intermediary interface between traffic agencies and complex, high-dimensional traffic
data, facilitating a self-organizing, self-optimizing, and self-supervising model for generating traffic analysis results.
The framework includes five LLM-based AI agents: Input Validation (IV) Agent, Self-Optimization Prompting (SP)
Agent, Database Interaction (DBI) Agent, Data Analysis (DAS) Agent, and Self-Supervision (SS) Agent. Specifically,
the IV Agent reviews and validates the user query, extracting pertinent information and defining project objectives.
The SP Agent optimizes prompts for better LLM responses. The DBI Agent autonomously retrieves necessary data,
enhancing data privacy. The DAS Agent analyzes this data, organizes subtasks with ML models, and generates insights,
reducing costs and improving accessibility to advanced techniques. Finally, the SS Agent supervises and optimizes
outcomes, ensuring quality results and addressing opacity with clear, actionable insights. The process concludes with
the generation of a meticulously crafted report. The contribution lies in:
• The research introduces an innovative multi-agent LLM framework, IDM-GPT, which autonomously conducts
traffic mobility analysis and generates customized traffic management and control suggestions based on user
queries in natural language. This system leverages LLMs to efficiently connect transportation users, traffic
databases, and ML models.
• From a methodological perspective, the research proves that the multi-agent LLM framework is able to handle
basic traffic mobility tasks with prompting. Additionally, an evaluation LLM is prompted and integrated into
IDM-GPT to grade the final output reports, facilitating system optimization. Without fine-tuning and manual
evaluation, users can utilize the IDM-GPT easily and reduce the cost of effort and time.
• IDM-GPT provides user-based analysis reports and customized management suggestions in a privacy-
preserving manner. The framework employs LLM Agents to separate users from the database, thereby
maintaining the confidentiality of traffic data.
Through IDM-GPT, traffic agencies are better equipped to make informed decisions and develop effective emergency
traffic control strategies, thereby improving urban mobility management. The structure of the paper is as follows:
Section 2 reviews related studies. Section 3 outlines the framework and introduces each AI agent. Section 4 discusses
the experimental results on real-world data, evaluates the performance of the framework, and includes an ablation study
to demonstrate the effectiveness of the AI agents. Section 5 concludes the paper and suggests directions for future
research.
2 Literature Review
The demand to derive traffic movements and patterns from data efficiently in order to ameliorate urban mobility
challenges enables traffic agencies to adopt advanced ML methodologies. In this context, LLMs serve as a pivotal
tool, potentially enhancing the deployment of ML models in mobility data analysis. This section seeks to encapsulate
and evaluate contemporary research on the role of LLMs in two key areas: 1) the challenges associated with these
approaches, and 2) the emerging role of LLMs and the multi-agent frameworks in overcoming these challenges. Prior
to further discussion on LLMs, this section provides an overview of the current state of research on ML applications in
the traffic field, which may serve as a foundational basis for the potential integration of LLMs.
2.1 ML in mobility analysis
Traditional statistical models have long been used for traffic forecasting and analysis; however, the non-linear and
complex nature of traffic patterns often limits their effectiveness. The advent of ML, particularly deep learning (DL)
3

Independent Mobility GPT (IDM-GPT) A PREPRINT
models, has provided more robust tools for capturing spatiotemporal dependencies in traffic data. Given such nature
of traffic data, researchers frequently utilize RNNs, especially LSTM networks, which excel at modeling temporal
sequences and have been employed to predict traffic flow based on historical data [23, 24, 25]. The accuracy of results
can be improved by integrating RNNs into various analyses or combining them with other methodologies. For example,
combining time series analysis with a 3-layer LSTM-BiLSTM model [26] and integrating Federated Deep Learning
with LSTM [27] have yielded promising outcomes. Additionally, some researchers applied attention mechanisms to
RNNs, as exemplified by the BiGRU-BiGRU model [28], hybrid LSTM, and sequential LSTM [29]. These approaches
enable the models to capture intricate dependencies within trajectory data, which is crucial for effective network traffic
management and congestion mitigation.
To improve the performance of RNN-based models, CNNs have been incorporated into time-series analysis for spatial
feature extraction due to their proficiency in handling grid-like data structures, making them suitable for analyzing
traffic flow in urban grids [8, 30]. For instance, the CNN-LSTM hybrid model has been shown to provide accurate
predictions by capturing both spatial and temporal traffic features [31, 32]. In another study, LSTM was utilized to
capture both inter-day and intra-day patterns, while CNN was employed to integrate contextual information [33].
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) have also gained attention for modeling traffic networks, representing road networks
as graphs to capture the relational information between different nodes (e.g., intersections, road segments) [34]. Recent
GNN-related research has focused on addressing the uncertainty of traffic data, thereby enhancing the robustness of
GNN models under varying and sparse data conditions. For instance, the Progressive Graph Convolutional Network
[35] learned similarities and extracted temporal features from graph nodes. The Ensemble-Based Spatiotemporal GNN
[36] optimized hyperparameter configurations and decomposed uncertainty from GNN ensembles. The Probabilistic
GNN [37] quantified the uncertainty of traffic demand while simultaneously revealing the spatiotemporal pattern of this
uncertainty. These models have shown promise in improving the accuracy of traffic prediction and anomaly detection.
Each of these neural network approaches brings distinct advantages to the analysis of traffic data, effectively handling
the complex spatial and temporal dependencies within such datasets. However, the wide variety of models in these
categories, each with its own strengths and limitations, poses challenges for agencies in terms of scalability, efficiency,
the need for expertise in both transportation engineering and ML, as well as concerns about data privacy and security.
In contrast, AI agents powered by LLMs could offer a more cost-effective solution, potentially streamlining traffic
mobility analysis.
2.2 AI Agents and LLMs
The emergence of AI agents empowered by LLMs offers potential solutions to the above-mentioned challenges. AI
agents are autonomous systems that interact with their environment through sensors and actuators to make decisions
and perform tasks, aiming to achieve specific objectives efficiently and effectively [ 38]. LLMs, such as OpenAI’s
GPT series and LLaMA, have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in understanding and generating human-like text
[15]. In transportation, LLMs can serve as intermediaries between users and complex ML models, enabling natural
language interfaces, automated data processing, and enhanced decision support. Current LLM-related research in the
transportation field can be classified into LLMs as predictors, synthetic data generators, assistants, and evaluators.
2.2.1 LLM-as-a-Predictor
LLMs are well-suited for predicting spatial-temporal traffic data due to their ability to capture complex dependencies,
integrate multimodal data, and model sequential patterns effectively. The R2T-LLM [39] was proposed as a novel traffic
flow prediction model leveraging LLMs for both accurate and explainable traffic forecasting. However, as noted in the
paper, generating coherent and contextually relevant explanations alongside predictions remains a challenge. To help
LLMs better understand time-series data, Ren et al. [40] effectively leveraged pre-trained LLMs for traffic prediction,
showing strong performance in both full-sample and few-shot scenarios. However, combining CNNs and GCNs to
handle spatiotemporal features increases computational complexity, which may pose challenges for implementation in
resource-constrained or real-time systems. Another approach to improving LLMs’ understanding of spatial-temporal
data is to tokenize timesteps and locations for embedding in the models. For instance, ST-LLM [ 41] introduced a
partially frozen attention strategy that effectively captures global spatial-temporal dependencies, though its reliance
on spatial-temporal embeddings can hinder its suitability for real-time decision-making applications such as dynamic
traffic management systems. UrbanGPT [42] utilized spatiotemporal instruction-tuning to achieve accurate zero-shot
predictions in urban scenarios. Although this model is designed for generalization, fine-tuning may still be needed
to optimize results for specific urban contexts, which could be challenging for organizations lacking the necessary
expertise or computational resources.
4

Independent Mobility GPT (IDM-GPT) A PREPRINT
2.2.2 LLM-as-a-Generator
LLMs are adept at generating realistic sequence data, making them particularly useful for generating traffic data in
simulations. While challenges remain in ensuring the fidelity and diversity of the generated data, LLMs have been widely
employed to simulate complex systems such as urban traffic flows and human mobility patterns [ 43]. For example,
SeGPT, a framework leveraging ChatGPT, excels at generating dynamic and complex scenarios for autonomous vehicle
trajectory prediction, aiding in model testing and adaptation across various real-world conditions [ 44]. However,
generalizing across different driving scenarios, particularly in low-data environments, remains a challenge. Similarly,
Chang et al. presented a framework for generating rare and complex corner scenarios for autonomous vehicle testing
using LLMs, enhancing scenario diversity and interoperability [45]. Nonetheless, the reliance on LLMs to generate
complex multi-agent scenarios introduces significant complexity in model design and implementation, which may make
it difficult to ensure that the scenarios accurately reflect real-world conditions. MobilityGPT [ 46], by leveraging a
gravity model and road connectivity matrix, successfully generated realistic synthetic trajectories. However, the absence
of formal privacy guarantees for the generated data raises concerns when such synthetic data is intended to preserve
privacy, potentially exposing sensitive information.
2.2.3 LLM-as-an-Assistant
LLMs can act as powerful assistants, enhancing various aspects of operations, management, and user interaction. Zhang
et al. [21] introduced TrafficGPT, which combines ChatGPT with traffic foundation models (TFMs) to enable natural
language interaction with traffic data analysis and decision-making processes. The model translates natural language
queries into prompts for TFMs, which then analyze traffic data to produce actionable insights and recommendations. This
innovative approach improves the accuracy, efficiency, and reliability of urban traffic management decisions. Similarly,
DriveLLM [47] is a framework that integrates LLMs into autonomous driving systems, enhancing commonsense
reasoning and decision-making in dynamic environments. However, in complex environments with multiple moving
objects, DriveLLM tends to make overly cautious decisions.
Research on LLM-as-an-Assistant in the transportation field remains relatively underdeveloped compared to their use
as predictors or generators. Although some frameworks have explored LLMs for enhancing traffic management and
autonomous driving through natural language interaction and decision-making, the scope and depth of this research
remain limited. The input methods in these studies may not always be flexible or generic enough, as users might be
uncertain about the best approach to achieve traffic project objectives. Additionally, the frameworks require substantial
human interaction, which may not always be the most efficient use of time and effort.
2.2.4 LLM-as-a-Judge
To evaluate LLM-generated results, traditional methods like BLEU [48], ROUGE [49], and METEOR [50] focus on
word and phrase matching but lack semantic and reasoning evaluation. Recent approaches like BERTScore [51] and
MoverScore [52] use contextual embeddings to assess semantics but are sensitive to nuances in word embeddings and
may misinterpret out-of-context phrases. To address these issues, LLM-based evaluation methods such as QAGScore,
GPTScore, G-Eval, and Prometheus have been developed. These methods offer better semantic understanding and
interpretability. QAGScore [53] evaluates factual consistency through a question-answering approach but is dependent
on question-and-answer quality. Prometheus [54] combines multiple metrics like factuality, fluency, and coherence,
but its complex implementation and high computational cost are drawbacks. GPTScore [55] offers flexibility through
fine-tuning for different criteria. Similarly, G-Eval [56], based on GPT models, excels at evaluating complex qualities
like logical flow and coherence, aligning closely with human judgments. In this paper, though GPTScore is fast and
flexible, G-Eval is preferred for its better alignment with human evaluations and logical thinking and reliable and
consistent performance in scoring tasks such as coherence, factuality, and relevance.
This paper aims to address the research gap by advancing LLM-as-an-Assistant research and developing a self-
motivating, generic framework—IDM-GPT—that assists users in identifying optimal analysis strategies, enhancing
data analysis efficiency, decision-making, and user interaction across various transportation tasks.
3 Methodology
This section elaborates on the detailed mechanisms of how IDM-GPT leverages LLM-based agents to efficiently identify
and manage traffic issues. The proposed multi-agent framework integrates advanced ML models with LLMs to process
and analyze complex, high-dimensional traffic data. Figure 1 presents the overall process, illustrating how IDM-GPT
deconstructs traffic-related tasks through a self-organizing, self-supervising, and self-optimizing approach.
5

Independent Mobility GPT (IDM-GPT) A PREPRINT
Figure 1: Overview of the IDM-GPT
3.1 Framework overview
This framework is designed to manage and analyze traffic data using LLMs and ML models, taking user queries as
input and producing comprehensive analysis reports that include traffic insights, visualizations, and suggestions. The
framework consists of five LLM-based agents:
IV Agent: This agent receives user queries and outputs formatted questions with clear objectives and scopes. It prevents
irrelevant inputs from wasting computational resources and clarifies the user’s intent, time, and location scope to help
create better prompts for LLMs, ensuring satisfactory results.
SP Agent: This agent takes the validated query or retrieved dataset, drafts a prompt, optimizes it, and forwards it to the
next LLM role. It is designed to generate high-performance prompts through iterative optimization.
DBI Agent: This agent converts prompts from the previous agent into SQL queries to retrieve necessary data from the
database. It ensures that user queries and database descriptions are translated into executable SQL queries effectively.
DAS Agent: This agent uses the optimized prompts, including the retrieved datasets, to produce diagrams, analyses,
and discussions represented by figures, tables, and text files. It employs various ML models, including NN, to analyze
traffic data. Depending on the query, the LLM Data Analyst selects appropriate ML models to identify traffic patterns
and reasons for traffic conditions, generating valuable insights for transportation improvements.
SS Agent: This agent takes the results from the DAS Agent and produces the final comprehensive analysis report,
which includes visualizations and detailed insights. It checks the quality of the analysis results to ensure accuracy and
relevance to the user query. Unsatisfactory results are looped back for further refinement.
The entire framework ensures a seamless process from user query to detailed analysis report, leveraging LLMs and
ML models for optimal traffic data analysis and insight generation. The examples of prompts of each agent have been
attached in Appendix 1.
6

Independent Mobility GPT (IDM-GPT) A PREPRINT
Figure 2: Input validator of the IDM-GPT
3.2 IV Agent
The process of this agent is illustrated in Figure 2. This process ensures that user queries are properly framed and
relevant to transportation-related issues before further processing. This research firstly uses an LLM-based validator to
do a semantic check for the input questionQ by using a predefined vector databaseD.
Let q represent the query Q as a semantic vector and q∈ Rn, where Rn is an n-dimensional vector space, and
D ={d1,d 2,...,d m} represent the set of database entries, where eachdi∈ Rn is also ann-dimensional vector. To
check the semantic similarity between the query q and an entrydi in the database, this paper uses cosine similarity,
which is a common measure for evaluating the similarity between two vectors in semantic space.
The cosine similarityS(q,d i) between the query vectorq and the database vectordi is given by Eq. 1:
S(q,d i) = q·di
∥q∥∥di∥ (1)
Where∥q∥ and∥di∥ are the Euclidean norms of the vectors q anddi. S(q,d i)∈ [−1, 1], where 1 indicates perfect
similarity, 0 indicates no similarity, and -1 indicates complete dissimilarity.
To determine if a query matches semantically with an entry in the database, a thresholdτ is set asS(q,d i)≥τd, where
τd is a pre-defined threshold indicating a sufficient level of semantic similarity for query topic checking.
Next, the Eq. 2 checks ifQ passes the semantic check and is a transportation-related query:
T (X) =
True S(q,d i)≥τd
False S(q,d i)<τ d
(2)
Similarly, a general functionF takesq and a set of reference vectorsri∈R, whereR is the database for vectors used
to validate the existence of objective and scopes as a reference, as inputs and checks if the similarity of relevant terms
or phrases inQ is greater than thresholdτr :
F (Q,R ) =
True if g(q,r i)≥τr
False if g(q,r i)<τ r
(3)
WhereR can beOr for objectives,Srp for time scopes, orSrl for location scopes.
This formulation allows the representation of conditions as Eq. 4 to 6:
O(Q) = F (Q,O r) (4)
Sp(Q) = F (Q,S rp) (5)
Sl(Q) = F (Q,S rl) (6)
Finally, the functionV (Q) determines ifQ is valid, ensuring it is transportation-related and contains both a rational
objective and scope:
7

Independent Mobility GPT (IDM-GPT) A PREPRINT
V (Q) = T (X)∧O(Q)∧Sp(Q)∧Sl(Q) (7)
where∧ denotes the logical AND operation.
IfV (Q) is true, it is transformed into a formatted question, ready for subsequent steps of data retrieval and analysis.
However, ifV (Q) is false, this agent requests clarification from the user to address the missing elements. The user
is prompted to provide additional information to ensure that the query is transportation-related and well-defined. For
queries that do not meet the criteria even after clarification, the system generates a general GPT response, which may
not be specific to transportation.
3.3 SP Agent
To seamlessly integrate the user query Q into system instructions and generate effective LLM prompts, this paper
introduces an AI agent that can optimize the prompts automatically. Building on the G-Eval method, this agent evaluates
the initial promptPd, which containsQ, to identify areas for improvement. The prompt is then iteratively refined until
it either reaches an optimal state or hits the maximum refining epoch, as shown in Algorithm 1. This iterative process
guarantees the creation of high-quality prompts, improving the performance of complex LLM tasks within IDM-GPT,
such as SQL generation and data analysis.
Algorithm 1 SP Agent
1: Initialize promptPd
2: Construct enhanced evaluation promptPe:Pe =Pd +Ie +Ce
3: SETepoch← 0
4: repeat
5: Le generates chain-of-thought steps CoTe
6: Pe.append(CoTe)
7: Calculate score ofPd usingScore(Pe)
8: ifScore(Pe)<τ e then
9: Update promptPd←C (Pd)
10: end if
11: INCREMENT epoch
12: untilScore(Pe)≥τe ORepoch >= MAX epoch
13: Return optimized promptPo
In this paper, we introduce an enhanced evaluation promptPe, which is derived from the initial promptPd by adding
two key components: the evaluation instructions Ie and the evaluation criteria Ce. Specifically, Pe is expressed as
Pe =Pd +Ie +Ce.
The evaluation instructionsIe guide the evaluator’s task, for example:
You will receive a preliminary prompt. Your task is to refine it for clarity and specificity to improve the quality of the
generated response.
The criteriaCe outline the dimensions on whichPd will be assessed, such as clarity, specificity, relevance, and brevity.
An example for clarity might read:
Clarity (1-100) – The overall understandability and straightforwardness of the prompt. A clear prompt minimizes
ambiguity and confusion, using simple language and avoiding jargon to ensure the task is precisely conveyed.
After constructingPe, the evaluation LLMLe generates chain-of-thought CoTe steps to assessPd. Using the scoring
function in Eq. 8,Le then scoresPd based on bothPe and CoTe.
Score(Pe) =
nX
i=1
p(si)×si (8)
Wheresi represents the score for a given criterion, and p(si) is the probability assigned to that score by Le. This
method allowsPd to be scored with variance close to human judgments, minimizing the occurrence of ties.
Then a thresholdτe is defined to determine if the similarity score is sufficient. IfScore(Pe)<τ e,Pd will be passed
through the LLM Prompt OptimizerLopt, which generates optimization suggestionsC(Pd). The new prompt is then
updated:
Pd←C (Pd) (9)
8

Independent Mobility GPT (IDM-GPT) A PREPRINT
whereC is the LLM critique process providing optimization suggestions. The process iterates, refining Pd until
Score(Pe)≥τe. This iterative process can be formally expressed as Eq. 10:
Po = lim
n→∞
Cn(Pd) (10)
WherePo is the optimized prompt.
3.4 DBI Agent
In this research, system instructions are developed to guide the LLM in generating SQL queries, demonstrating the
effectiveness of this approach. To ensure the accurate generation of SQL queries, instructions are meticulously crafted
to provide detailed descriptions of the database schema and multiple examples of natural language questions paired
with their corresponding SQL queries. These examples are carefully selected to illustrate the pattern and structure of
the task, helping the LLM learn how to translate natural language into SQL syntax effectively. To further enhance the
model’s capability of handling different types of queries and generating appropriate SQL statements, examples covering
a wide range of SQL operations, such as selection, filtering, aggregation, joining, and sorting, are incorporated.
The DBI Agent is integral to data privacy management, providing a secure interface between users and traffic databases
that contain sensitive trip trajectory information. By mediating access, it minimizes direct human interaction with
personal data, significantly reducing the risk of unauthorized exposure. Additionally, the agent employs customized
prompts to anonymize personal travel details, ensuring compliance with data protection standards. This proactive
approach not only safeguards user privacy but also strengthens data handling practices, fostering trust and reliability in
managing sensitive information.
3.5 DAS Agent
The DAS Agent in IDM-GPT plays a crucial role in interpreting and visualizing traffic data. This agent takes an
optimized prompt as input, which includes a description of the retrieved dataset. The process involves several key
steps: understanding the dataset, planning the analysis, selecting appropriate machine learning models, analyzing and
visualizing the data, discussing results, and deriving insights and suggestions. This process is represented in Algorithm
2.
Algorithm 2 DAS Agent
1: Input:D,Quser,M
2: Output: Analysis resultR, InsightsI, SuggestionsS
3: R, I, S, A← []
4: Step 1: Understanding the Dataset
5: Ddescription← Describe(D)
6: SETP ={Ddescription, Quser, M}
7: Step 2: Planning the Analysis
8: A← LLM.PlanSteps(P )
9: for each analysis stepai inA do
10: Step 3: Model Selection
11: Mj← LLM.ModelSelect(ai, Quser, Mj)
12: Step 4: Analysis and Visualization
13: Rj←Mj(D)
14: Step 5: Discussion and Insight Derivation
15: Ij← LLM.Interpret(Rj)
16: Sj← LLM.Suggest(Quser, Ij)
17: R.append(Rj)
18: I.append(Ij)
19: S.append(Sj)
20: end for
21: ReturnR, I, S
Algorithm 2 starts by accepting three inputs: the dataset D, the user query Quser, and a structured description of
alternative ML modelsM. The expected outputs are analysis resultsR, insightsI and suggestionsS.
9

Independent Mobility GPT (IDM-GPT) A PREPRINT
The process begins by creating a system instructionP for the LLM, which includes the dataset descriptionDdescription,
the user queryQuser, and the available modelsM.Ddescription is generated by a non-LLM function and contains statistical
metadata and data types for each column, whileQuser defines the objective and scope of the query.
The LLM usesP to generate an analysis planA, comprising a series of analytical tasksai to address the user’s query.
For each task, the LLM selects a suitable modelMj based onD,Quser, and the characteristics of each model inM. The
selected modelMj is then applied toD, producing intermediate resultsRj.
Next, the LLM interprets Rj to extract insights Ij and generate suggestions Sj. The final outputs R,I, and S are
aggregated from all steps, providing a comprehensive set of insights and recommendations addressing the user query.
3.6 SS Agent
This agent ensures the quality of traffic analysis results by comparing them against predefined criteria and iteratively
optimizing the results if necessary. In this agent, the G-Eval method is employed to obtain the evaluation scoreE of the
evaluation criteriaC. The desired results criteriaC ={C1,C 2,...,C n} consist ofn key components. Given the initial
resultR and the desired result criteriaC, the SS Agent operates through a series of steps to ensure the final output meets
the specified criteria. This agent refines and improves the LLM’s result by allowing the LLM to evaluate and improve its
own output using the Recursive Criticism and Improvement (RCI) approach [57]. RCI is an iterative process designed
to refine and enhance prompts to ensure they meet predefined quality standards. The process is shown in Algorithm 3.
Algorithm 3 SS Agent
1: Input:R, I, Sfrom Algorithm 2, Desired Results CriteriaC
2: Output: Optimized Output ResultsR′, InsightsI′, SuggestionsS′
3: SETR′←R
4: SETI′←I
5: SETS′←S
6: SETepoch← 0
7: repeat
8: E←L (R′, I′, S′|C)
9: ifE <Ethreshold then
10: IS←L opt(R′, I′, S′|C)
11: Prompt← RCI(R′, I′, S′,IS )
12: R′, I′, S′← LLM.analyze(Prompt ) {Algorithm 2}
13: end if
14: INCREMENT epoch
15: untilE >= Ethreshold ORepoch >= MAX epoch
16: returnR′,I′,S′
In Algorithm 3R, I, Sis evaluated againstC using an LLM reviewerL. This evaluation is represented by eq. 11 and
eq. 12:
E =L(R, I, S|C) (11)
E =
nX
i=1
p(si)×si (12)
whereE denotes the evaluation score on how well the results meet the criteria. The evaluation scoreE is calculated
in eq. 12, whereS ={s1,s 2,...,s t} represents a set of scores from 1 tot predefined in the prompt,p(si) represents
the probability of si calculated by the LLM. If E indicates that the results are not satisfactory, i.e. E < Ethreshold,
the LLM generates improvement suggestionsIS by the optimization processLopt. Based onIS, R′
old, I′, andS,R
is regenerated by prompting with the RCI approach and calling Algorithm 2 to produce improved result R′
new. The
process iterates untilE meets or exceeds the thresholdEthreshold, or the number of recursions reaches the maximum
MAX epoch. This iterative optimization ensures that the traffic analysis results are continuously improved until they
meet the predefined quality standards.
10

Independent Mobility GPT (IDM-GPT) A PREPRINT
4 Experiments & Results Evaluation
This section aims to validate the performance of the proposed IDM-GPT in real-world transportation applications,
especially focusing on the role of LLM in the IV Agent, SP Agent, DBI Agent, DAS Agent, and SS Agent. The
data used in the experiment was collected from the loop detectors installed in the Greater Seattle Region. During the
experiment, the similarity score between the outputs from IDM-GPT and the analysis results from human operators was
used to evaluate the system’s performance. Finally, sample results are presented to demonstrate the effectiveness of
IDM-GPT.
4.1 Experiment Configuration
In this study, GPT-4o serves as the LLM for IDM-LLM, with the system constructed using Python 3.9 and OpenAI
APIs. The experiments are conducted on a PC equipped with an NVIDIA RTX 4060 GPU, an Intel Core i9 CPU, and
32 GB of RAM, ensuring a robust computational environment. The choice of GPT-4o is driven by a balance between
performance and cost considerations. The ML models provided to IDM-GPT for selection include traditional models
and NNs, such as CNNs, LSTMs, and GNNs. For complex real-world tasks conducted by traffic agencies, fine-tuned
LLMs can replace GPT-4o, while modified ML models can be employed to achieve better performance, enhanced
reliability, and reduced costs.
For the SP Agent, a threshold of τ = 0.8 is set, and seven criteria are used: 1) clarity and precision, 2) context and
relevance, 3) directiveness, 4) appropriate length, 5) structured format, 6) objective and neutral, 7) avoiding ambiguities,
and 8) multiple questions.
For the DBI Agent, this paper defines 7 prompt-SQL categories to guide the LLM in generating SQL queries. These
include select, conditional, join, aggregate, filter-with-join, date range, and group by queries, each designed to address
specific data needs like retrieving, filtering, or segmenting information. Each category provides a structured prompt-SQL
example, enabling the LLM to accurately map user queries to SQL by referencing targeted examples, thus enhancing
query precision and effectively meeting user requirements. The example of the prompt-SQL pairs has been attached in
Appendix 1 Example of prompt of DBI Agent.
For model selection in the DAS Agent, this paper provides 6 ML models for the LLM to choose from. The models
include LSTM for handling long-term temporal patterns and traffic predictions, GNN for modeling and understanding
spatial relationships, autoencoders for detecting traffic patterns, random forest for reasoning tasks, reinforcement
learning for optimal routing selection, and Hidden Markov Models for detecting traffic flow irregularities.
For the SS Agent, the evaluation criteria for analysis results are described in the following sub-section. The total
evaluation score ranges from 0 to 1, with a thresholdEthreshold set at 0.8. The maximum number of epochs is set to 3 for
iterative refinement and assessment.
4.2 Evaluation Criteria
The LLM results evaluation criteria consist of two components: numerical results evaluation (NRE) and textual results
evaluation (TRE). The NRE involves coding algorithms to validate the quality of the data retrieved from databases
and to assess the accuracy of numerical analysis results generated by LLMs. The TRE focuses on evaluating the
discussions of findings, insights, and suggestions derived from those insights using well-established criteria for LLM
output evaluation. These criteria include coherence, relevance, factual accuracy, and logical flow, which are commonly
applied in LLM evaluation frameworks such as BLEU, ROUGE, METEOR, and GPTScore. The detailed evaluation
framework ensures a comprehensive assessment of both numerical and textual aspects of the LLM outputs, enhancing
the reliability and quality of the results.
• Data Integrity (DI): Verify that the input data used in the analysis is accurate, complete, and representative of
the traffic conditions.
• Result Correctness (RC): For queries with ground truth answers, like predictions and incident detections,
evaluate the LLM’s result in terms of MSE.
Given the open-ended nature of the analysis model selection and results of IDM-GPT, the G-Eval method is leveraged
for evaluation. The evaluation criteria of the results include:
• Model Validation (MV): Ensure the existence of ML model evaluation metrics such as mean absolute error
(MAE), root mean square error (RMSE), R-squared, and precision/recall for classification tasks.
11

Independent Mobility GPT (IDM-GPT) A PREPRINT
• Contextual Relevance (CR): Assess whether the insights provided are relevant to the specific traffic issues
being analyzed.
• Explanation Quality (EQ): Check that the ML model results include clear explanations and interpretations.
The rationale behind the predictions should be understandable.
• Visualization Clarity (VC): Evaluate the visualizations for clarity, accuracy, and ease of interpretation. Good
visualizations should effectively communicate the key insights without being misleading or overly complex.
Following the G-Eval method, GPT-4o serves as the evaluation LLM, assessing results based on the above criteria. The
evaluator uses the CoT approach to analyze each criterion, generating detailed evaluation steps and assigning a score
from 0 (worst) to 1 (best). Probability-based normalization refines these scores for more precise results, capturing the
quality of generated texts and aligning with human metrics, offering a robust assessment of the LLM outputs.
4.3 Data Description
The database comprises traffic data from over 24,000 loop detectors embedded on 33 major roads in Seattle, WA,
including highways and local main streets. The data, collected at a frequency of one minute, includes features such as
volume, occupancy, velocity, loop detector location, and loop detector types. This dataset supports various analyses,
including traffic volume and speed assessments, traffic conditions evaluations, and traffic pattern analyses, enabling the
derivation of valuable insights. In the subsequent experiments, the input query is limited to a time span of one week to
manage data costs, computational resources, and processing time effectively.
4.4 Performance Evaluation
Based on the database, this paper defines four main evaluation categories: 1) Make Accurate Prediction (MAP), 2)
Optimize Operation (OO), 3) Enhance Safety (ES), and 4) Improve Decision-Making (ID-M). Each category is divided
into nine subcategories: 1) Real-Time Traffic Prediction (RT-TP), 2) Real-Time Congestion Forecasting (RT-CF), 3)
Weather Impact Prediction (WIP), 4) Complex Network Analysis (CNA), 5) Personalized Routing (PR), 6) Incident
Detection in Traffic Patterns (IDTP), 7) Accident Risk Factor Identification (ARFI), 8) Predictive Safety Measures
(PSM), and 9) Event Impact Scenario Simulation (EISS). With 15 queries per subcategory, a total of 135 queries are
designed to evaluate IDM-GPT’s performance in supporting decision-making and improving urban mobility. These
queries cover aspects such as traffic prediction, safety, optimization, and simulation. The detailed query structure is
provided in 4 in Appendix 2.
To benchmark IDM-GPT, this paper uses the vanilla GPT-4o model as a baseline. Since GPT-4o cannot directly access
the database, it is first provided with a description of the database and then prompted to generate SQL queries manually.
Once the dataset is retrieved, the baseline model is prompted again, along with the dataset and specific queries, to
analyze the data and address the user’s queries. This process ensures that the baseline model performs similar analysis
steps as IDM-GPT, allowing for a fair comparison between the two models. The evaluation results for both models are
shown in Table 1 and Table 2.
Table 1: Evaluation Results of Baseline model (GPT-4o)
Category Subcategory DI RC MV CR EQ VC
MAP RT_TP 0.8990 0.2044 - 0.4966 - 0.3735
RT_CF 0.9593 0.2343 - 0.4021 - 0.2813
WIP 0.9557 0.3182 - 0.4313 - 0.3702
OO CNA 0.9052 - - 0.7504 - 0.2589
PR 0.8126 0.5344 - 0.8510 - 0.3211
ES IDTP 0.8422 0.3592 - 0.6085 - 0.2949
ARFI 0.8235 0.4096 - 0.4548 - 0.2900
PSM 0.7821 0.2979 - 0.5645 - 0.3577
IDM EISS 0.7997 0.1161 - 0.3548 - 0.3685
12

Independent Mobility GPT (IDM-GPT) A PREPRINT
Figure 3: Average Scores for Each Criterion
Table 2: Evaluation Results of IDM-GPT
Category Subcategory DI RC MV CR EQ VC
MAP RT_TP 0.8851 0.5409 0.9057 0.7943 0.8793 0.6979
RT_CF 0.9245 0.3638 0.9870 0.8577 0.9479 0.8998
WIP 0.8561 0.3459 0.8369 0.7295 0.8311 0.7848
OO CNA 0.7629 - 0.8121 0.7672 0.7961 0.7327
PR 0.8287 0.7296 0.9391 0.9257 0.9615 0.7700
ES IDTP 0.8221 0.5713 0.9839 0.9178 0.9980 0.8752
ARFI 0.8799 0.8147 0.9390 0.9592 0.9719 0.8491
PSM 0.8198 0.6094 0.9413 0.9872 0.9460 0.7373
ID-M EISS 0.6987 0.4189 0.8245 0.6621 0.8311 0.7608
The value for the subcategory CNA under the RC criterion is blank in both tables because reasoning questions in this
category are open-ended, allowing for multiple correct answers. As such, no ground truth is established for these
queries.
In Table 1, the columns MV and EQ are empty because the baseline model cannot automatically leverage machine
learning models without explicit prompting. Without ML-driven analysis, the baseline model cannot derive sufficient
insights from the dataset, resulting in lower evaluation scores for user queries in other criteria as well.
For the DI criterion, both IDM-GPT and the baseline GPT models perform similarly with scores on the same scale.
This is because the data retrieval step follows the same prompting strategy in both cases, ensuring that the input data
used for analysis is of comparable quality. Thus, the consistency in data input leads to similar results in terms of data
integrity for both models.
During the experiment, the baseline GPT-4o struggled to visualize complex data accurately without detailed prompting.
Although the diagrams generated by the baseline model were well-designed and included all necessary elements like
axis labels, legends, and titles, the numerical values it selected were incorrect. As a result, while the titles and visual
objectives appeared meaningful, the overall VC scores were significantly lower than those of IDM-GPT.
The DI scores suggest that IDM-GPT’s DBI Agent is more effective in identifying and retrieving congestion-related
datasets and relevant forecasting data. Although both models have similar DI scores, the baseline GPT-4o scores are
significantly lower on RC, highlighting its struggle to correctly address mobility-related queries, even when given
adequate data. This shortcoming negatively impacts its scores in CR and VC, as its analytical performance is insufficient
for detailed insights. In contrast, IDM-GPT leverages ML models to generate deeper insights, enabling it to address
user queries more effectively and achieve high scores across the remaining criteria.
Based on Figure 4, IDM-GPT excels in ES queries, showcasing its strong ability to reason about traffic safety factors.
Its performance is slightly lower on MAP queries due to limitations in the prediction accuracy of its ML models, though
it remains robust overall. In contrast, IDM-GPT faces challenges with OO and ID-M queries, as optimizing traffic
networks involves complex, experience-driven adjustments and interdisciplinary considerations. This indicates that
13

Independent Mobility GPT (IDM-GPT) A PREPRINT
Figure 4: Average Scores for Each Subcategory of Query
Table 3: Result of ablation study. Bold numbers indicate the numbers with the largest difference compared to the
baseline system without skipping any agents.
Agent
Skipped
DI RC MV CR EQ VC Avg
IV 0.5234 0.4052 0.8125 0.6473 0.8322 0.6138 0.6391
SP 0.8985 0.5326 0.9275 0.7740 0.8092 0.6240 0.7610
SS 0.9154 0.4792 0.8084 0.7265 0.6919 0.5913 0.7021
None 0.9264 0.5724 0.9714 0.7987 0.9012 0.7065 0.8127
integrating more specialized knowledge could enhance its analysis of OO queries. For ID-M queries, performance is
constrained by the current ML models in use. Introducing advanced models, such as state-of-the-art diffusion models
or generative adversarial networks, could significantly improve IDM-GPT’s capability to generate synthetic data,
suggesting a direction for future enhancements.
4.5 Ablation Study
IDM-GPT consists of five agents, with the DBI Agent and DAS Agent being essential to the framework’s functionality,
while the other three agents can be omitted. To validate the effectiveness of the IV Agent, SP Agent, and SS Agent,
an ablation study was conducted by repeating the experiment and sequentially omitting each agent. The results of the
average evaluation scores are compared among different agent-skipped systems and the baseline system without any
agent skipped. The evaluation is summarized in Table 3.
When the IV Agent is omitted, the framework performs poorly on the DI, RC, and CR scores. Without reformatting the
user query or extracting its objective and scope, the LLM-based DBI Agent struggles to understand the user’s intent,
resulting in inadequate dataset retrieval. Consequently, the DAS Agent fails to generate relevant insights, leading to
incorrect and ineffective responses to the user query.
The absence of the SP Agent lowers performance across all criteria. Without prompt optimization, the prompts become
unclear, diminishing the effectiveness of LLM-based agents like DBI and DAS. Sub-optimally structured prompts cause
IDM-GPT to overlook important requirements, resulting in inaccurate analyses and incomplete visualizations, which
hinders its ability to derive meaningful insights.
14

Independent Mobility GPT (IDM-GPT) A PREPRINT
Omitting the SS Agent primarily impacts all criteria except DI, as it operates in the later stages of IDM-GPT. While data
retrieval remains relatively unaffected, the absence of SS compromises the final analysis. Without SS, the generated
findings lack the necessary model validation metrics and clear, simplified visualizations, both of which are crucial for
easy interpretation. This leads to sub-optimal insights that do not fully address the user query.
Overall, the average value shows each agent’s importance to IDM-GPT. The lower the value, the more important the
agent is. These findings emphasize the essential roles that the IV , SP, and SS Agents play in ensuring the accuracy,
relevance, and quality of IDM-GPT’s outputs. Each component is critical to maintaining the framework’s performance
and delivering meaningful results.
5 Conclusions
Acquiring relevant traffic data and selecting appropriate models to support traffic management can be costly, time-
consuming, and labor-intensive for transportation agencies. The complexity of advanced ML models demands significant
resources for accurate results, while the widespread use of data collection devices raises concerns over personal mobility
data privacy. IDM-GPT, as an AI agent, addresses these challenges by streamlining traffic data analysis, enabling the
efficient and accurate processing of high-dimensional, spatio-temporal traffic data. Additionally, the AI agent ensures
data privacy is maintained throughout the process, mitigating risks associated with handling sensitive personal mobility
information. This research makes several notable contributions:
• Framework Connecting Traffic Agencies to Databases via LLMs: IDM-GPT effectively bridges traffic agencies
with complex traffic data systems, simplifying the interaction by interpreting user queries and generating SQL
queries for efficient data retrieval and analysis.
• Enhancing Accessibility and Reducing Costs: By integrating LLMs with ML models, IDM-GPT improves
usability across various traffic scenarios. The framework’s ability to select and apply appropriate ML models,
such as CNNs, LSTMs, and GNNs, reduces both costs and the level of expertise required while demonstrating
accuracy in recognizing and predicting traffic patterns.
• Improving Data Privacy: IDM-GPT enhances data privacy by leveraging LLMs to access remote databases
without direct human intervention. Users only receive the final report, ensuring secure data processing and
maintaining the confidentiality of personal traffic data.
Despite these contributions, this study has limitations. Reliance on online LLMs, such as ChatGPT, raises stability
concerns, suggesting the need for offline models to ensure consistent performance. Additionally, the model selection
process could be improved by refining the application of ML models in specific circumstances and expanding the range
of models to include more cutting-edge options. Furthermore, the evaluation process could be optimized by finding a
better combination of criteria weights rather than averaging evaluation scores to determine the final result.
Future research will focus on developing domain-specific AI agents tailored for various transportation analysis tasks,
incorporating advanced multi-modal data processing. Further exploration could also examine real-time data integration
and applying IDM-GPT across diverse urban environments. Integrating IDM-GPT with emerging technologies like
edge computing and IoT devices offers potential for further improvements.
In conclusion, this research demonstrates the effectiveness of combining LLMs with ML models for traffic data analysis.
IDM-GPT provides a scalable solution for improving traffic management and urban mobility, offering a significant
contribution to the field. It lays a strong foundation for future advancements in transportation research and practical
applications.
6 Acknowledgments
The authors express their gratitude to the Washington State Department of Transportation for providing traffic loop
detector data and their invaluable support for this research. Additionally, ChatGPT-4o was utilized for polishing the
manuscript.
7 Author Contributions
Fengze Yang contributed to the conceptualization, methodology, software development, and original draft preparation.
Xiaoyue Cathy Liu contributed to the writing (review and editing). Lingjiu Lu contributed to the literature review and
experiments. Bingzhang Wang was involved in data investigation. Chenxi (Dylan) Liu (corresponding author) was
responsible for project administration supervision and contributed to the writing (review and editing).
15

Independent Mobility GPT (IDM-GPT) A PREPRINT
8 Declaration of Conflicting Interests
Xiaoyue Cathy Liu is a member of the Transportation Research Record’s Editorial Board.
All other authors declared no potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research, authorship, and/or publication
of this article.
9 Funding
The authors disclosed no financial support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this article.
16

Independent Mobility GPT (IDM-GPT) A PREPRINT
