record_id: arxiv:2603.10646
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.10646
fetched_title: ESG Reporting Lifecycle Management with Large Language Models and AI Agents
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T18:59:54Z

ESG Reporting Lifecycle Management with Large
Language Models and AI Agents
Thong Hoang∗§, Mykhailo Klymenko∗§, Xiwei Xu∗, Shidong Pan∗,
Yi Ding†, Xushuo Tang†, Zhengyi Yang†, Jieke Shi‡, David Lo‡
∗CSIRO’s Data61, Australia; †University of New South Wales, Australia; ‡Singapore Management University, Singapore
§ Authors contributed equally to this work.
Abstract—Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG) stan-
dards have been increasingly adopted by organizations to demon-
strate accountability towards ethical, social, and sustainability
goals. However, generating ESG reports that align with these
standards remains challenging due to unstructured data formats,
inconsistent terminology, and complex requirements. Existing
ESG lifecycles provide guidance for structuring ESG reports but
lack the automation, adaptability, and continuous feedback mech-
anisms needed to address these challenges. To bridge this gap, we
introduce an agentic ESG lifecycle framework that systematically
integrates the ESG stages of identification, measurement, report-
ing, engagement, and improvement. In this framework, multiple
AI agents extract ESG information, verify ESG performance,
and update ESG reports based on organisational outcomes. By
embedding agentic components within the ESG lifecycle, the
proposed framework transforms ESG from a static reporting
process into a dynamic, accountable, and adaptive system for
sustainability governance. We further define the technical re-
quirements and quality attributes needed to support four main
ESG tasks, such as report validation, multi-report comparison,
report generation, and knowledge-base maintenance, and pro-
pose three architectural approaches, namely single-model, single-
agent, and multi-agent, for addressing these tasks. The source
code and data for the prototype of these approaches are available
at https://gitlab.com/for_peer_review-group/esg_assistant.
I. INTRODUCTION
ESGstands for Environmental, Social, and Governance,
which are dimensions to evaluate organisations’ sustainability
aspects and ethical impacts in our society. The environmental
dimension assesses how organizations mitigate climate change
effects and control pollution. The social dimension examines
organizational social standards related to diversity and inclu-
sion as well as human rights. The governance dimension evalu-
ates an organization’s approach to adherence to regulations and
ethical decisions. Organizations have started to focus on ESG
after realizing that it supports their long-term success [7]. In
2025, ESG disclosures become mandatory for organisations in
many countries (e.g., the U.S., the United Kingdom, and Sin-
gapore), requiring them to report their sustainability impacts
to evaluate the organizations’ sustainability performance and
risks.1
Existing ESG standards [6], [15] assist organisations in
estimating their ESG performance and maintaining account-
ability, reliability, and transparency in their ESG reporting.
However, there are several challenges in automating, verifying,
1https://www.presgo.com/resources/global-mandatory-esg-disclosures/
and aligning ESG reports with the ESG standards across
organisations.
Unstructured and heterogeneous formats. ESG data exists in
varied formats, e.g., tables, narratives, scanned documents,
and multimedia, making consistent extraction difficult. Optical
Character Recognition (OCR) and rule-based systems often
introduce errors, reducing reliability.
Inconsistent terminology and irrelevant content. Differences
in terminology (e.g., “greenhouse gas emissions” vs. “carbon
footprint”) and reporting granularity impede normalization.
Moreover, ESG reports blend substantive information with
promotional content, complicating automated filtering.
Multi-standard alignment. Mapping ESG reports across multi-
ple ESG standards remains non-trivial due to divergent scopes
and taxonomies.
Updating ESG standards and regulatory pressure. Frequent
updates to global ESG standards, i.e., SASB [15], require
adaptive models capable of incorporating new taxonomies
and compliance requirements.
Various ESG lifecycles [3], [9] have been proposed to help
organisations align their ESG information with ESG standards;
however, they do not address the challenges in generating
ESG reports. These challenges, such as unstructured data
formats, inconsistent terminology, and complex multi-standard
alignment, require an automated and intelligent framework
to process and interpret ESG data. Existing lifecycles are
domain-specific, lack mechanisms for continuous feedback,
and depend on manual data collection and interpretation. As
a result, they are unable to address the challenges inherent in
ESG reporting.
To address these issues, we present an agentic ESG life-
cycle framework designed to enhance automation, explain-
ability, and adaptability in assisting organizations to follow
ESG standards. The proposed framework includes five stages:
identification, measurement, reporting, and engagement. To
operationalize this lifecycle, we embed Large Language Mod-
els (LLMs) as agentic components across all stages. These
agentic components enable automation and explainability by
extracting ESG data from various sources and aligning them
with ESG standards to automatically generate ESG reports and
update them based on sustainability performance.
Based on the ESG lifecycle, we present technical require-
ments and quality attributes necessary to operationalize an
LLM-based ESG framework. Specifically, we define four
arXiv:2603.10646v1 [cs.SE] 11 Mar 2026

2. An Agentic ESG Lifecycle
• Identification: Standard intelligence agent
• Measurement: Data intelligence agent
• Reporting: Communication agent
• Engagement: Engagement agent
• Improvement: Performance agent
1. ESG Discovery
• Analyzing ESG reports
• Reviewing ESG lifecycles
-
3. Requirements
• Functional requirements
• Quality attributes5. Case Study
• Single-model architecture
• Single-agent architecture
• Multi-agent architecture 4. Architecture Design
• Single-model architecture
• Single-agent architecture
• Multi-agent architecture
Fig. 1: Overview of the proposed framework in our research
paper.
primary tasks: (1) report validation and compliance checking,
(2) multi-report comparison and trend evaluation, (3) auto-
mated report generation, and (4) maintenance of a knowledge
base of ESG standards and regulations. Each task can be
employed by LLMs to improve their accuracy and efficiency.
Apart from traditional quality attributes, i.e., modularity, flex-
ibility, scalability, autonomy, and robustness, we also identify
LLM quality attributes, such as explainability, context rele-
vance, and answer faithfulness, to improve transparency and
trustworthiness of the LLM-based ESG framework.
Our paper also introduces three architectural approaches
for implementing the LLM-based ESG framework in these
tasks. First, a single-model architecture is designed where
one LLM handles all tasks by prompting. Second, a single-
agent architecture approach employs retrieval-augmented gen-
eration (RAG) and external tools, including data parsers, ESG
databases, and sentiment analyzers, to present results. Finally,
a multi-agent architecture integrates a specific agent for each
ESG task, such as validation, comparison, and reporting. In
the proposed single-agent and multi-agent architectures, RAG
is a core knowledge base component to ensure accuracy and
explainability for ESG tasks.
In summary, the main contributions of our paper are as
follows:
•Proposes an agentic ESG lifecycle framework that integrates
LLMs across all lifecycle stages to enable automation,
adaptability, and explainability in the ESG platform.
•Identifies four main ESG tasks: (1) report validation, (2)
report comparison, (3) report generation, and (4) knowledge
base maintenance. We then define the technical requirements
and quality attributes necessary for implementing an LLM-
based ESG framework.
•Proposes three different architectural approaches for imple-
menting these four main tasks.
II. PROPOSEDFRAMEWORK ANDESG DISCOVERY
A. Proposed Framework
Existing research on sustainability and ESG reporting [13],
[14] identifies several components for enabling organizations
to produce transparent and reliable ESG reports for invest-
ment decision-making. Figure 1 presents an overview of
our proposed framework. Specifically, it includes five core
components:
1)ESG discovery:Our methodology begins by analyzing
ESG reports from organisations to understand their ESG
reporting structures and disclosed ESG metrics. Moreover,
we also review existing ESG lifecycles to understand their
limitations.
2)ESG lifecycle refinement:We introduce an agentic ESG
lifecycle framework designed to enhance automation, ex-
plainability, and adaptability in organisational adherence
to ESG standards. It also facilitates the decision-making
process for investors and stakeholders.
3)Requirements:Based on this agentic lifecycle, we define
the functional requirements and quality attributes, i.e., mod-
ularity, flexibility, and usability, necessary to support ESG
tasks, such as report validation, multi-report comparison,
and report generation.
4)Architecture design:We propose three architectural ap-
proaches for implementing an LLM-based framework to
address ESG tasks. First, we introduce a single-model
architecture in which a single LLM is responsible for
all tasks by relying on prompt engineering. Second, we
present a single-agent architecture that integrates retrieval-
augmented generation and external tools, i.e., data parsers
or sentiment analyzers, to solve these tasks. Lastly, we
propose a multi-agent architecture in which we define a
specific agent for each ESG task.
5)Case study:We implement a prototype for each of the
proposed architectures, such as the single-model, single-
agent, and multi-agent architectures, focusing on the ESG
report validation and compliance checking task. In this case
study, human manual verification serves as the baseline. We
compare the effectiveness of the three architectures using
three evaluation metrics, i.e., accuracy, computational cost,
and energy consumption.
B. ESG Discovery
The ESG discovery is the first component of our research
methodology. Its goal is to analyze ESG reports to understand
how organizations align their ESG reports with ESG standards,
i.e., GRI or SASB. This component also includes a review of
existing ESG lifecycles, which helps identify their limitations
and motivates the development of our agentic ESG lifecycle.
1. Analyzing ESG reports:We manually reviewed 13 ESG
reports2 and conducted a structured content analysis to exam-
ine their reporting structures and disclosed metrics. For each
report, we extracted its ESG factors and mapped them to GRI,
SASB, and TCFD standards. We categorized these factors into
three ESG dimensions, i.e., environmental, social, and gover-
nance. Table I presents selected ESG reports from major global
organisations, illustrating how their ESG metrics align with
ESG standards, namely GRI [6], SASB [15], and TCFD [16].
2https://gitlab.com/for_peer_review-group/esg_assistant

TABLE I: Summary of selected ESG reports. The Global Reporting Initiative [6], Sustainability Accounting Standards
Board [15], and Task Force on Climate-Related Financial Disclosures [16] standards are represented as [G], [S], and [T],
respectively. Combined labels indicate overlap across standards, i.e., [GS] or [GST]. Symbols indicate reporting challenges: †
multi-standard alignment, ‡ heterogeneous or unstructured disclosure formats.
Organisation Environmental Dimension Social Dimension Governance Dimension
BP†‡ - Scope 1+2:↓35% vs. 2019 [GST]
- Carbon investment: $2.2B [S]
- Renewables pipeline: 23 GW [GST]
- Hydrocarbon flaring:↑967kt [GS]
- Women in leadership: 31% [GS]
- Vehicle accidents:↓20% [G]
- Oil spills: 121 [GS]
- Concerns raised:↓14% [G]
- Sustainability committee meetings
[G]
- Human rights policy [GS]
Microsoft†‡ - Scope 1+2:↓17% [GST]
- Carbon removal: 1,443,981 tons [G]
- Waste diversion: 12,159 tons [G]
- Clean water: 1,000,000 people [G]
- Supplier decarbonization [G]
- Clean energy access [G]
- Land protection [G]
- Sustainability committee review [T]
- Internal carbon fee applied [T]
- Sustainability scorecards [G]
Dell†‡ - Scope 1+2↓44% [GST]
- Renewable electricity: 61.5% [GS]
- Recycled materials: 14.1% [G]
- E-waste recovered: 90,000 tons [S]
- Women in leadership: 29.1% [GS]
- Inclusive culture: 16.1% [GS]
- Health & well-being [G]
- Work-related fatalities: 0 [G]
- Customer security audits [GS]
- ESG steering committee [GS]
- Human rights committee [GS]
Pfizer†‡ - Scope 1+2:↓13.9% [GST]
- Energy consumption [GST]
- Climate performance KPI [T]
- Climate risk analysis [T]
- Patients treated: 525.2M [G]
- Women at VP+: 44.8% [GS]
- Product donation programs [GS]
- Health workers/facilities [G]
- Compensation [G+S]
- Regulatory & compliance committee
[G]
- ESG progress reporting [G+S]
NVIDIA†‡ - Renewable energy target [GST]
- GPU efficiency: 20×CPU [S]
- Scope 1+2+3 disclosed [GST]
- Landfill diversion: 71% [G]
- Audit coverage: 50% [GS]
- Strategic suppliers: 100% [GS]
- Code of conduct compliance [GS]
- Parental leave: 22 weeks [G]
- TCFD framework implemented [T]
- Sustainability committee [GS]
- Annual supplier report [GS]
Each selected organization represents an individual domain,
e.g., energy for BP; 3 software for Microsoft; 4 hardware for
Dell5 and NVIDIA;6 biotechnology for Pfizer.7 We select these
reports due to their maturity and transparency in disclosing
ESG information. As shown in Table I, the comparison of ESG
metrics across 13 ESG reports reveals two primary challenges
that organisations face when aligning their ESG data with
multiple standards as follows.
Multi-standard alignment. Many ESG metrics appear across
multiple standards; however, each standard requires different
expectations for the same metric. For example, Scope 1, Scope
2, and Scope 3 greenhouse gas emissions metrics, presented
in teal in Table I, reflect the requirements of three standards:
GRI [6], SASB [15], and TCFD [16]. However, each stan-
dard interprets these metrics differently. SASB requires the
quantitative emissions numbers. GRI expects an explanation
of how these emissions relate to an organisation’s operations.
TCFD requires organizations to embed these metrics within a
financial climate risk context. As a result, organisations must
reinterpret the same metrics multiple times to satisfy diverging
expectations from multiple standards.
Unstructured and heterogeneous formats. The ESG reports in
Table I show that ESG metrics are presented in varied
formats, requiring substantial manual effort to extract and
understand from stakeholders for investment decisions. For
example, BP and NVIDIA employ multi-column tables to
3https://www.bp.com/
4https://www.microsoft.com/
5https://www.dell.com/
6https://www.nvidia.com/
7https://www.pfizer.com.au/
report key environmental metrics such as greenhouse gas
emissions, landfill diversion, and energy efficiency. Microsoft
focuses on providing narrative explanations for these metrics,
while Dell presents renewable electricity and recycling metrics
using infographics and sidebars. Pfizer summarizes Scope 1–3
emissions using figures and charts. The combination of tables,
figures, and explanations creates significant challenges for
stakeholders, making it difficult to interpret and compare ESG
reports across organisations.
2. ESG lifecycles:Table II presents four ESG lifecycle frame-
works, each corresponding to a specific domain. We identify
three limitations of these existing ESG lifecycles.
•Each lifecycle focuses on a specific domain, lacking the
flexibility to extend to other domains or organizations. For
example, the Invest Europe ESG lifecycle applies only to
private equity, while ESRS is employed for EU organiza-
tions.
•The ESG lifecycles lack a feedback system that supports
organizations in improving the alignment of their ESG
information with the lifecycle’s outcomes. For instance, the
ESG–LCSA framework ends at the decision stage and offers
no guidance on how organizations should incorporate the
results of those decisions back into earlier stages, limiting
opportunities for refinement of aligning the ESG informa-
tion.
•The ESG lifecycles lack automation capabilities for integrat-
ing ESG data across their stages. For example, both the ESG
maturity model and the ESRS reporting lifecycle outline
detailed stages and procedural steps; however, these steps
depend on human effort to collect, extract, and align ESG
information at each stage.

TABLE II: Summary of ESG lifecycles
Framework Domain Stage Description
Invest Europe ESG lifecycle
tool [3]
Private equity and venture
capital investment.
- Fundraising
- Due diligence and ownership
- Monitoring and reporting
- Exit and distribution
Maps ESG dimensions to each stage of the full
investment cycle. This framework focuses on
alignment between investors and organizations
on long-term value creation.
ESRS reporting lifecycle
model [9]
Corporate sustainability re-
porting under EU standards.
- Preparation and scoping
- Materiality assessment
- Data collection and control
- Disclosure and assurance
Provide a detailed 189-step reporting process
for organizations. The framework focuses on
regulatory compliance and audit readiness,
mainly applying to EU organizations.
Generic ESG-LCSA integra-
tion framework [11]
Academic sustainability sci-
ence and product life-cycle
assessment.
- Goal and scope definition
- Inventory and impact assessment
- Interpretation and decision support
Integrates environmental, social, and eco-
nomic dimensions into the ESG decision-
making process. Supports product-level sus-
tainability investment decisions.
ESG maturity model [12] Organizational ESG gover-
nance and capability devel-
opment.
- Minimalist
- Pragmatist
- Strategist
- Trailblazer
Provides ESG program assessment and
roadmap design. Aligns ESG data with
organizations’ values to build the trust of
stakeholders.
Fig. 2: An agentic ESG lifecycle
These limitations highlight the need for an agentic ESG life-
cycle that can be adopted across organizational domains. The
agentic lifecycle integrates continuous feedback mechanisms
to improve alignment between ESG data and the various stages
of the process based on the decision outcomes. It also includes
automation capabilities to collect and extract ESG information
across departments and align it at each stage of the lifecycle,
thereby reducing manual effort and enhancing ESG reporting
efficiency.
III. ANAGENTICESG LIFECYCLE
In this section, we present an agentic ESG lifecycle designed
to address the key limitations identified in existing ESG
lifecycles, i.e., a domain-specific focus, a lack of continuous
improvement, and automation capabilities. The core com-
ponents of our agentic ESG lifecycle are derived based on
analysis of ESG reports from organisations, existing ESG
lifecycles, as well as major ESG standards, e.g., GRI, SASB,
and TCFD. This analysis reveals that organisations must
perform regulatory interpretation, conduct data measurement,
prepare and disclose ESG reports, engage with stakeholders,
and continuously improve their ESG performance to align
with these standards. In addition, our proposed agentic ESG
lifecycle adopts two main principles observed in advanced
agentic AI systems: (1) agents specialize in specific tasks, and
(2) agents exchange outputs to solve problems and improve
performance [8], [18]. Figure 2 shows the proposed agentic
ESG lifecycle, including five iterative stages: identification,
measurement, reporting, engagement, and improvement. We
employ a specific AI agent for each stage to address its
challenges. These agents interact by exchanging their outputs,
thereby improving their performance on ESG tasks across
the ESG lifecycle. Although the lifecycle is iterative, orga-
nizations can employ any AI agent they need based on their
ESG maturity level and operational priorities. Our proposed
ESG lifecycle is an LLM-based agentic ESG system, helping
automation and transparency across all stages. The following
texts describe each stage in more detail.
3.1. Identification:The agentic ESG lifecycle begins with the
identification stage, where organisations determine the relevant
ESG standards, metrics, and data sources applicable to their
operations. In this stage, anESG Standards Intelligence Agent
(ESIA) is employed to interpret complex ESG standards and
identify ESG metrics.
3.1.1. Input: The inputs to ESIA include (i) organisational
information such as industry sector, market position, or
stakeholders’ expectations; (ii) ESG standards, e.g., GRI,
SASB, and TCFD; and (iii) ESG data collected from industry
databases, e.g., the CDP Global Environmental Disclosure
Platform8 and MSCI ESG Ratings. 9
3.1.2. Prompt strategy:ESIA employs a role-based prompting
approach to act as an ESG compliance analyst. The prompt
8https://www.cdp.net/en
9https://www.msci.com/our-solutions/esg-investing/esg-ratings

integrates organisational information and relevant ESG docu-
ments to recommend suitable ESG standards and ESG metrics.
3.1.3. Output:The output of ESIA includes (1) a set of
ESG standards aligned with the organisation’s profile; (2) a
list of relevant ESG metrics grouped under environmental,
social, and governance categories; and (3) a list of regulatory
requirements.
3.2. Measurement:This stage focuses on how organizations
collect, validate, and analyze their ESG data. In this stage, an
ESG Data Intelligence Agent(EDIA) assists organizations in
extracting ESG information, standardizing data formats, and
ensuring data quality across multiple internal sources.
3.2.1. Input:The inputs to EDIA include ESG data from
internal sources, such as human resources, financial systems,
and operational databases; the selected ESG metrics; and the
regulatory checklist generated from the identification stage.
3.2.2. Prompt strategy:EDIA employs a multi-step prompt-
ing strategy. First, extraction prompts are used to identify
and retrieve ESG data information from multiple internal
sources. Second, normalisation prompts guide the model to
standardise ESG data according to predefined ESG metrics.
Third, validation prompts instruct the model to detect missing,
inconsistent, or anomalous values for checking and aligning
with the selected ESG standards. Finally, comparative prompts
help benchmark against historical ESG datasets to evaluate the
quality and completeness of our extracted ESG data.
3.2.3. Output:The output of this stage is a structured and
standardized ESG dataset aligned with the ESG metrics and
standards. This dataset is used in subsequent stages, i.e.,
reporting, engagement, and improvement.
3.3. Reporting:This stage aims to transform the ESG dataset
into a comprehensive ESG report for decision-makers and
stakeholders. In the agentic ESG lifecycle, anESG Com-
munication Agent(ECA) automates regulatory compilation,
visualization, and regulatory alignment, hence minimizing
manual effort for disclosing ESG information.
3.3.1. Input:The inputs to ECA include: (i) the standardized
ESG dataset generated in the measurement stage, (ii) the
selected ESG standards and compliance checklist defined
in the identification stage, and (iii) stakeholder regulatory
requirements.
3.3.2. Prompt strategy:ECA employs four prompt strategies.
First, we employ regulatory mapping prompts to align ESG
data with the selected ESG metrics. Second, visualisation
prompts convert ESG data into visual formats such as dash-
boards, charts, and risk heatmaps, enabling clearer insights
into ESG performance and improving the readability for stake-
holders. Third, report-generation prompts assist in drafting
ESG reports based on the visualisations and performance
indicators of the previous step. Finally, alignment prompts
ensure the ESG report meets investor expectations, stakeholder
requirements, and relevant regulatory obligations.
3.3.3. Output:The outputs of this stage include a generated
ESG report containing visual representations of ESG perfor-
mance indicators, as well as narrative summaries highlighting
key trends, risks, and achievements.
4. Engagement:The engagement stage focuses on strength-
ening communication and collaboration between organizations
and their stakeholders and investors. In this stage, anESG
Stakeholder Engagement Agent(ESEA) assists by summariz-
ing discussions, analyzing stakeholder feedback, and respond-
ing to ESG-related inquiries.
3.4.1. Input:The inputs to ESEA include ESG reports from
organisations and stakeholders’ documents, i.e., meeting tran-
scripts, emails, and responses.
3.4.2. Prompt strategy:ESEA employs summarisation, anal-
ysis, and response-generation prompts. The summarisation
prompts focus on extracting key expectations and requirements
from stakeholders’ documents. The analysis prompts aim to
align these expectations to specific ESG indicators mentioned
in ESG reports. The response-generation prompts provide
responses and update frequency for answering-question docu-
ments to ensure clarity and responsiveness between organisa-
tions and stakeholders.
3.4.3. Output:The outputs of this stage include a summari-
sation document of stakeholders’ requirements and their ESG
indicators.
5. Improvement:The improvement stage enhances ESG
strategies through continuous evaluation, feedback integration,
and long-term performance monitoring. In this stage, an ESG
Performance Improvement Agent (EPIA) assists by identifying
ESG risk, analyzing ESG performance, evaluating investment
decisions, and recommending information to keep the ESG
report up-to-date.
3.5.1. Input:EPIA requires (i) an ESG report and ESG
data from previous stages, (ii) historical ESG performance
data from organisations, (iii) stakeholders’ feedback, (iv)
predefined ESG risk criteria, and (v) industry benchmarks
or investment guidelines. These inputs provide both internal
performance indicators and external expectations necessary for
performance evaluation.
3.5.2. Prompt strategy:EPIA employs multiple prompts. The
risk prompts to detect risk factors in ESG reports and ESG
data and may suggest actions to mitigate these identified
risks. The evaluation prompts to compare current ESG factors
in their reports against historical ESG performance data to
identify the ESG factors that need to be improved. The
investment prompts to assess how these ESG factors align
with investment activities. Finally, the monitoring prompts are
employed to track ESG performance over time and raise alerts
when potential issues arise.
3.5.3. Output:This stage outputs (i) an ESG risk assessment
report with recommended mitigation actions, (ii) a perfor-
mance evaluation summary highlighting improvement areas,
and (iii) ongoing performance monitoring reports. These out-
puts enable organisations to continuously refine ESG strategies
and update ESG reports.
IV. ARCHITECTURE OFLLM-BASEDESG FRAMEWORK
A. Functional requirements & Quality attributes
The selection of architectural solutions is guided by a com-
bination of functional requirements and quality attributes [17].

Building on the agentic ESG lifecycle, we define four main
ESG tasks to support ESG reporting activities. We present
functional requirements and describe quality attributes for
these tasks. The tasks are key activities in the ESG lifecycle
and can be automated, assisted, or fully delegated to modern
AI systems. Each task functions as an expert system, which
can be implemented using LLMs as the underlying engine. We
present them as follows:
1. Report validation and compliance checking:The tool
functions as an expert system that evaluates the compliance
of an ESG report with a selected ESG standard. It outputs a
completeness score based on the alignment between the report
and the standard and provides a list of missing ESG metrics
to guide organizations in improving their reports. This task
supports the agentic ESG lifecycle by contributing to Stage 1
(identification) and Stage 5 (improvement).
2. Multi-report comparison:Given an ESG standard and
multiple user-submitted ESG reports, the tool evaluates the
completeness and compliance score of each report and pro-
vides a ranked list of these reports. This task is related to
Stage 4 (engagement) of the agentic ESG lifecycle.
3. Report generation:The tool generates an ESG report
aligned with a given ESG standard and interacts with users
to request any required information. This task corresponds to
Stage 3 (reporting) of the agentic ESG lifecycle.
4. ESG knowledge base maintenance:The tool processes
ESG documents, i.e., standards, reports, and regulatory re-
quirements, extracts key information, and stores it in a
database structured for use in retrieval-augmented generation
systems. This task supports Stages 1 (identification) and 2
(measurement) of the agentic ESG lifecycle.
In light of these tasks and the overall agentic ESG lifecycle,
we identify eight quality attributes. These attributes were
derived from the analysis of ESG reports and standards, and
consideration of LLMs’ characteristics, i.e., reliability and
scalability. The attributes capture the key system requirements
necessary to support accurate ESG reporting, effective human
interaction, and robust automation across the ESG lifecycle.
(1) Accuracyensures ESG systems provide correct and reliable
outputs.(2) Usabilityreflects how easily users interact with
ESG systems.(3) Modularityenables each ESG task function
to operate as an independent component that can be activated
based on user decisions.(4) Flexibility and adaptabilityde-
scribe the ability of users to reconfigure ESG tasks, including
the integration of AI models to adapt to changing situations.
(5) Scalabilityensures that ESG systems can perform multiple
tasks in parallel.(6) Fault toleranceguarantees that the failure
of a single AI agent does not compromise the entire ESG
system.(7) Explainabilityensures that outputs from ESG
systems can be explained in a human-understandable manner.
(8) Answer faithfulnessevaluates how consistent an ESG sys-
tem’s output is with its supporting context or source material.
Note that bothexplainabilityandanswer faithfulnessquality
attributes are relevant to LLM-based ESG systems.
Context
Short-term
Output
LLM
Prompt 3
Prompt 2
Prompt 1
(a)
Knowledge
Long-term
Knowledge graph
Data busRAG
Context
Short-term
Output
LLM
Prompt 3
Prompt 2
Prompt 1
Tools
Tools
Tools
Tools
(b)
Tools
Manager
Knowledge
Long-term
Context
Short-term
Output
Supervisor
Knowledge graph
Data bus
RAG
RAG
RAG
(c)
Fig. 3: Architectural approaches for an agentic ESG sys-
tem: single-model (a), single-agent (b), and multi-agent (c).
The colors indicate component roles, with purple, dark blue,
yellow, and green representing knowledge sources, prompts,
LLM-based agentic components, and non-LLM tools and
RAG, respectively.
B. Proposed architectures
We propose three architectural approaches for addressing
the ESG tasks defined in the previous section. Conceptually,
each approach corresponds to a specific architectural design: a
single-model architecture, handling different tasks using vari-
ous prompts; a single-agent architecture, combining different
prompts with external tools; and a multi-agent architecture,
assigning each task to a specific AI agent.
In this paper, we employ the LangChain framework10 to im-
plement a prototype for each proposed architecture, focusing
on the ESG report validation task. 11 We choose LangChain as
it is one of the most popular LLM frameworks, widely adopted
by research community and align with our proposed architec-
tures [1], [2], [18] For all three architectures, the user interface
includes a prompt and a file input, supporting two types of
inputs: one for temporary files, i.e., ESG reports, and another
for files intended to populate the permanent knowledge base.
We explain these architectures in the following paragraphs.
The single-model architecture employs a single LLM that
interacts directly with the user through prompt-based com-
munication (see Fig. 3a). It operates without supporting com-
10https://www.langchain.com/
11https://gitlab.com/for_peer_review-group/esg_assistant

TABLE III: Performance of three architectural approaches for the ESG report validation task (average results across ESG
reports for mean absolute error (MAE), tokens, LLM calls, cost, and energy)
Architecture Mean absolute error across the datasets Cost metrics evaluated for the Report A
Report A Report B ESG Reports Tokens LLM calls Cost (USD) Energy (kWh)
GRI GRI GRI SASB TCFD
Single-model 51% 26% 32.30% 20.08% 23.90% 87,541 1 $0.88 0.175
Single-agent 22% 6% 19.01% 21.46% 26.95% 295 2 $0.03 0.006
Multi-agent 12% 4% 9.82% 16.31% 19.59% 30,996 216 77 $0.03 0.061
ponents such as local databases, knowledge graphs, or RAG
modules. Consequently, all domain knowledge is embedded
solely within the model’s internal weights, and the required
context is provided through the prompt. The files provided by
the user are converted into string variables and included as
part of the prompt.
In the single-agent architecture (Fig. 3b), we enhance an
LLM with RAG and tools. File inputs are processed through
two pipelines (PDF loaders, parsers, OCR, and text splitters):
one for temporary storage and the other for populating the
knowledge base. The temporary storage holds uploaded ESG
reports and is implemented using vector stores [2], which
enable efficient similarity search for RAG. For the report
validation task, this architecture employs a dedicated tool
that leverages knowledge encoded as a checklist for each
ESG standard, validating the uploaded ESG report against
each checklist entry using similarity search. It then assigns
“Yes/No” labels for each item in the checklist based on
a predefined threshold. Finally, the single-agent architecture
calculates a compliance score as the ratio of “Yes” labels.
The multi-agent architecture (in Fig. 3c) employs agentic
RAG and multiple AI agents, each responsible for a specific
ESG-related task. Here, we adopt the supervisor architectural
pattern,12 in which several agents communicate through a
central supervisor agent. The supervisor agent interacts with
the user, interprets his requests, such as validation, analysis,
comparison, generation, or improvement, and orchestrates the
appropriate agents. For the validation task, this architecture
calls the validation agent to follow the checklist and retrieve
relevant information from the document using RAG. Each
checklist item is evaluated using an LLM to perform semantic
reasoning, resulting in a “Yes/No” label. The compliance score
is calculated similarly to the single-agent architecture.
V. CASE STUDY
In this paper, we apply the proposed architectures to the
task of report validation and compliance checking. We create
synthetic data, including two ESG reports generated from
the GRI standard with LLM assistance, followed by human
editing and verification: Report A, which is fully compliant
with the GRI standard, and Report B, in which 50% of the
required information was intentionally omitted. In evaluation,
we employ 13 ESG reports and construct ground-truth labels
through manual annotation. Specifically, we mapped disclosed
ESG factors extracted from each report to the corresponding
ESG metrics defined in the GRI, SASB, and TCFD standards.
12https://docs.langchain.com/oss/python/langchain/supervisor
We use mean absolute error, computational cost, and estimated
energy as evaluation metrics for the report validation task [1].
Note that the lower error indicates better performance.
Table III presents the results of the three architectural ap-
proaches. The single-model architecture, using GPT-5, shows
the highest error across the datasets, with 51% and 26% error
for Report A and Report B, respectively. It also incurs the
highest cost (0.88 USD) and energy consumption (0.175 kWh)
due to passing the entire document and a lengthy system
prompt. The single-agent architecture, also based on GPT-
5, performs well on synthetic reports but less effectively on
ESG reports; however, it is the most computationally efficient
with the lowest cost (0.03 USD) and energy consumption
(0.006 kWh). The multi-agent architecture, employing both
GPT-5 and GPT-4o mini, achieves the lowest errors across
most datasets, with 12% and 4% error for Report A and
Report B, and the smallest mean absolute errors for the ESG
reports: 9.82% (GRI), 16.31% (SASB), and 19.59% (TCFD);
however, its energy consumption is lower than the single-
model architecture due to the use of dedicated tools and
RAG. Our paper focuses on architectural design rather than
model benchmarking; hence, other LLMs (other than GPT-
5 and GPT-4o mini) can be integrated into our proposed
architectures. While the results may differ across various
LLMs, the tradeoff between single-model, single-agent, and
multi-agent remains consistent.
A key limitation of the single-agent architecture is its
development cost. Each tool requires a task-specific heuristic
algorithm with parameters that influence overall performance;
developers must spend time tuning these parameters, leading
to significant manual effort and higher overall cost. In con-
trast, the multi-agent architecture delegates most computations
to the LLM, minimizing implementation effort. Both these
architectures offer strongmodularityandflexibility, allowing
new tools or agents to be added easily. In this case study,
we notice that the single-model architecture requires more
user interactions due to the lack of context and a clear task
methodology, leading to increased cognitive load and reduced
usability.
VI. RELATEDWORK
Various ESG standards have been proposed to guide or-
ganizations to disclose their ESG performance. Specifically,
ESG standards are often grouped into two categories, i.e.,
industry standards and governance standards. Industry stan-
dards, such as GRI [6], SASB [15], and TCFD [16], define
whatorganizations should measure and provide related to

three dimensions: environmental, social, and governance. On
the other hand, governance standards, i.e., CSRD [4], the EU
Taxonomy [5], and OECD [10], explainhoworganizations
should report and manage their ESG information within legal
and policy contexts.
Although ESG standards provide valuable guidance, they
also increase operational complexity. Before employing ad-
vanced large language model (LLM) techniques, organizations
must first develop a structured understanding of regulatory
requirements, define and align concepts across multiple ESG
standards, normalize heterogeneous data sources and formats,
and design workflows that are compatible with automation.
Without this domain knowledge, we limit the effectiveness,
reliability, and interpretability of LLM systems. In this paper,
we propose an agentic ESG lifecycle that can help domain
understanding, harmonization, and workflow formalization,
thereby establishing the necessary foundation for integrating
LLM capabilities to address ESG problems, i.e., informa-
tion extraction [20] and text classification [19]. We believe
that the mentioned challenges, i.e., transforming heteroge-
neous data formats, structuring complex domain knowledge,
and designing automation-compatible workflows, are common
across many other domains; hence, the contribution of this
study extends beyond ESG, illustrating broader principles for
deploying LLM-based systems in real-world organizational
settings.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we propose an agentic ESG lifecycle that
bridges the gap between the challenges of generating ESG
reports, such as unstructured data, inconsistent terminology,
and multi-standard alignment, and the limitations of existing
ESG lifecycles, including domain specificity, lack of con-
tinuous feedback, and insufficient automation. The proposed
lifecycle consists of five stages, i.e., identification, measure-
ment, reporting, engagement, and improvement, in which
each stage is supported by an AI agent. Building on this
lifecycle, we define four core ESG tasks, i.e., report validation,
multi-report comparison, report generation, and knowledge-
base maintenance, and present their technical requirements
with quality attributes. We then propose three architectural
approaches to address these tasks: a single-model, a single-
agent, and a multi-agent architecture. These architectures are
evaluated using both synthetic and real-world ESG reports.
The results show that the single-model architecture is the
least accurate and the most costly in terms of computation
cost and energy consumption. The single-agent architecture is
highly efficient but heavily depends on heuristic tools, while
the multi-agent architecture achieves the highest accuracy with
moderate computational cost. Future work includes developing
an adaptive agent system capable of automatically selecting
the most suitable architecture based on ESG task complexity
and resource constraints and extending multi-agent capabilities
to handle complex ESG tasks. Overall, our paper provides
a foundation for integrating AI agents to transform ESG
from static reporting activities into dynamic, automated, and
accountable sustainability governance. Moreover, the broader
contribution of this work lies in demonstrating that deploying
LLMs in real-world settings requires deep domain knowledge,
the normalization of heterogeneous data sources and formats,
and the design of workflows. Without such information, LLMs
alone cannot reliably address complex domain tasks.
Acknowledgement.This research/project is supported by the A*STAR under its
2nd CSIRO and A*STAR: Research-Industry (2+2) Partnership Program (Award
R24I5IR047). Any opinions, findings and conclusions or recommendations expressed
in this material are those of the author(s) and do not reflect the views of the A*STAR.
