record_id: arxiv:2607.07379
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.07379
fetched_title: PHYSICS-AUDITEDAGENTICDISCOVERY INSCIENTIFIC MACHINELEARNING
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:28Z

PHYSICS-AUDITEDAGENTICDISCOVERY INSCIENTIFIC
MACHINELEARNING
PREPRINT
Diab W. Abueidda1,2*, Bilal Ahmed1, Panos Pantidis1, Mostafa E. Mobasher1†
1Civil and Urban Engineering Department, New York University Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates
2National Center for Supercomputing Applications, University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign, United States of America
July 9, 2026
ABSTRACT
In agentic scientific machine learning (SciML), large language model (LLM) agents can discover
surrogate models and select one by an automated score, typically an error metric. A low error,
however, does not establish that the predicted fields satisfy the physics that matter for mechanics, such
as boundary conditions, superposition, stiffness scaling, or causality. We introduce Physics-Audited
Agentic SciML (PA-SciML), a verification-first workflow for agentic SciML discovery. The workflow
fixes a scoring evaluator before search, derives reviewable machine-checkable physics requirements,
checks each trained candidate on its outputs, and separately searches prescribed input ranges or
measured load-history spans for high-violation cases without reference solution fields. A surrogate is
reported as verified only under the stated checks. When enabled, the workflow also adds advisory
numerical probes before training and tests one modeling change at a time to record which isolated
edits are associated with score gains before reuse. In the reported computational-solid-mechanics
numerical examples, the static elasticity run selects a surrogate with lower validation error than the
error-only baseline while both selected models pass the common linear-elastic checks. In the transient
elastodynamics run, an error-only baseline with similar mean error fails a stricter causality check by
responding to future parts of the loading history, while the selected surrogate passes the stated checks.
The main distinction is per-candidate physics evidence on predicted fields, not a richer aggregate
score.
Keywordsagentic discovery · scientific machine learning· large language model agents· physics-based verification·
neural operators·trustworthy surrogate models
1 Introduction
Computational solid mechanics often requires repeated solutions to PDE-governed boundary-value and initial-boundary-
value problems. Design sweeps, uncertainty quantification, inverse identification, and digital-twin workflows can
require many evaluations of full displacement, stress, or history-dependent field responses. High-fidelity finite-element
simulations remain the reference tool, but repeated solves can be too expensive when the geometry, material law, loading,
or boundary data must be varied many times. Scientific machine learning (SciML) and neural-operator surrogates
offer a complementary route: learn a map from problem inputs to solution fields so that a new case can be evaluated
without a fresh finite-element solve [1–4]. The practical difficulty is that constructing a useful surrogate still depends on
problem-specific choices of architecture, training strategy, physics-informed structure, and evaluation metric.
Large language model (LLM) agents are beginning to automate parts of this workflow. One branch writes and runs
simulation code for finite-element mechanics and computational fluid dynamics [ 5–8]. Another branch automates
engineering design and design review [9]. A third branch, closest to this paper, automates SciML model discovery:
∗Corresponding author:abueidd2@illinois.edu
†Corresponding author:mostafa.mobasher@nyu.edu
arXiv:2607.07379v1 [cs.AI] 8 Jul 2026

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
agents can propose surrogate designs, implement training code, critique candidates, and select models with limited
human intervention [ 10–12], building on earlier automation of physics-informed network design [ 13, 14]. These
systems make surrogate design less manual, but they also move a mechanics question to the center of the workflow:
after an automated system selects a surrogate, what evidence shows that its predicted fields satisfy the physics the model
is meant to emulate?
Score- or reward-mediated selection is not enough to answer that question. A validation error, training loss, or
composite scientific reward can rank candidate models, but it does not necessarily check each trained surrogate’s outputs
against machine-checkable physical requirements. Existing agentic SciML systems include important verification and
diagnostic steps, but those checks are generally aimed at generated code, execution, plan consistency, or aggregate
reward rather than at a separate output-level physics check on each scored surrogate [11, 12]. This is the gap addressed
here. A selected surrogate may be plausible because it scores well, yet still lack direct evidence that its predicted fields
obey the stated boundary, symmetry, scaling, or time-ordering requirements. The risk is also recognized in the agentic
SciML literature: LLM-mediated debate may not reflect physically rigorous reasoning unless it is paired with numerical
verification [10].
The gap is consequential in the numerical examples reported below, but in different ways across the two mechanics
problems. In the static linear-elasticity example, a common post-run audit shows that both the audit-enabled selected
surrogate and the error-only baseline satisfy the stated linear-elastic checks; there, the audit provides supporting evidence
that the lower-error selected surrogate has not traded accuracy for violations of superposition, stiffness scaling, or roller
boundary conditions. In the transient elastodynamics example, the distinction is decisive: rechecking an error-only
baseline against a stricter causality requirement shows that it responds to future parts of the loading history. This is an
output-level failure of the predicted field, not merely an implementation inconvenience. Together, the examples show
why low error should not be read as evidence that a selected surrogate passes the stated physics checks.
We introduce Physics-Audited Agentic SciML (PA-SciML), a verification-first framework for agentic SciML discovery
that adds per-candidate physics evidence to model selection. The framework is designed for agentic SciML more
broadly; this paper demonstrates it on neural-operator surrogates for computational solid mechanics. PA-SciML fixes
reviewable physics requirements before candidate search, scores every successful candidate with one fixed evaluator,
applies sampled, machine-checkable physics checks to predicted outputs, and separately searches prescribed input
ranges or measured load-history spans for high-violation cases without reference solution fields. A selected surrogate is
reported as verified only under the stated checks. When enabled, the workflow also adds advisory pre-training numerical
probes for proposed model changes and tests one isolated edit at a time to record the changes associated with score
gains before reuse.
The contribution of this work is to make specified physics-check evidence part of the selection evidence for automated
surrogate discovery. Rather than treating low validation error as sufficient, PA-SciML requires the predicted fields
of a selected surrogate to pass prescribed machine-checkable physics checks in the stated verification setting. The
numerical examples show two complementary roles for this evidence. In the static elasticity example, it documents that
the selected lower-error surrogate remains consistent with the stated linear-elastic checks. In the transient example, it
exposes a causality failure that the error metric misses. The same framework also records supporting evidence around
the selection decision, including searches over admissible inputs without reference solution fields, advisory numerical
probes before full training, and isolated-edit tests after discovery. This separation keeps failed execution, predictive
error, physics-check results, and post-run analysis from being conflated.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: section 2 situates PA-SciML within the SciML, neural-operator,
agentic-discovery, and trustworthiness literatures; section 3 details the framework and verification layer; section 4
presents the experimental design and numerical examples; and sections 4.4 and 5 discuss limitations and outlook.
2 Related work
Scientific machine learning provides one route from repeated PDE solves to reusable surrogate models. Physics-informed
neural networks embed governing-equation residuals in the training objective [1], while the broader physics-informed
machine-learning literature shows how governing equations, boundary and initial conditions, conservation constraints,
and data can be combined in neural models for forward and inverse PDE problems [ 2]. These works establish a
foundation for physics-informed neural PDE solvers and surrogate models, but practical use still leaves problem-
dependent choices: the architecture, residual weighting, training strategy, and the form in which physical information
enters the model.
Neural operators and related full-field surrogates address the many-query setting by learning maps from problem
inputs to solution fields. The theory behind this class of models includes universal approximation results for nonlinear
2

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
operators [15] and the modern neural-operator framework, in which learned maps act between function spaces [16]. Two
architectures anchor much of the field: DeepONet, which combines branch and trunk subnetworks [3], and the Fourier
neural operator, which parameterizes an integral kernel in Fourier space [4]. Approximation-error estimates are available
for DeepONet [17]. Both families have expanded in directions important for PDE surrogates: physics-informed operator
learning adds residual-based constraints to the learned map [18, 19]; DeepONet variants include multiple-input operators
[20] and comparative extensions benchmarked against Fourier neural operators [ 21]; and Fourier-operator variants
address general geometries and multiphase-flow prediction [22, 23]. For this paper, the relevant design space includes
both function-to-function operators and parameter- or load-to-field surrogates built from operator-learning architectures.
Across that space, the architecture, physics-informed loss terms, geometry encoding, and data representation remain
choices made for each problem.
In computational solid mechanics, learned surrogates have been developed for several physical tasks rather than a
single model family. Constitutive and field-response surrogates cover path-dependent plasticity, thermo-viscoplastic
transient material behavior, and full-field stress prediction [ 24–26]. Energy-based neural formulations have been
introduced for finite-deformation hyperelasticity [27]. Operator-learning and parametric-PDE work covers fracture and
damage, reduced models of input-output maps, nonlocal kernel networks, time-dependent input histories, and geometry-
dependent full-field prediction [28–32]. A complementary finite-element-coupled line embeds neural networks inside
finite-element solvers for nonlocal continuum damage and coupled multiphysics [33, 34], within a broader machine-
learning and data-mining literature for continuum mechanics [35]. This literature demonstrates that surrogate models can
represent rich mechanics responses, but it also illustrates why surrogate construction remains expert- and task-specific:
each study must choose the architecture, training formulation, geometry representation, finite-element coupling, and
physical structure appropriate to its problem.
Automating those modeling choices is therefore a natural next step. Auto-PINN searches over selected PINN architecture
and hyperparameter choices using training loss as the search objective [ 36]. PINNsAgent uses Physics-Guided
Knowledge Replay with Memory Tree Reasoning Strategy to optimize PINN architectures and hyperparameters [13],
while Lang-PINN coordinates PDE, PINN, code, and feedback agents to turn natural-language task descriptions
into executable PINN code with validation or feedback steps [14]. More recent agentic SciML systems broaden the
search from tuning toward model and method discovery. AgenticSciML combines role-specialized agents, structured
debate, retrieval of prior methods, and evolutionary search to generate and select SciML solutions [ 10]. ATHENA
organizes numerical method discovery as an iterative propose-implement-evaluate process guided by expert-derived
blueprints and a composite scientific reward [ 11]. GRAFT-ATHENA extends this direction toward cross-problem
transfer through structured problem and method representations, metric neighborhoods, and reward-calibrated priors
[12]. These systems indicate that agentic search can reduce manual method design. At the same time, their selection
mechanisms are mediated by training loss, validation error, scientific reward, diagnostics, or trial history, rather than
by a separate machine-checkable output test on each selected learned surrogate. AgenticSciML also identifies the
underlying risk directly: LLM-mediated debate and justification may not reflect physically rigorous reasoning unless
paired with numerical verification signals [10]. Reported error levels across this literature are regime-specific: canonical
physics-informed PDE benchmarks, data-driven Burgers operator learning, and solid-mechanics surrogate learning
differ in problem class, supervision, and metric [11, 12].
Language-model agents have also been applied to neighboring parts of the scientific and engineering pipeline. Agents
can write, run, or debug mechanics, finite-element, PDE, and OpenFOAM workflows [5–8]. Other systems address
knowledge-guided engineering design and optimization [9], autonomous chemistry experiment planning [37], tool-
augmented chemistry reasoning [38], and end-to-end AI research workflows [39]. These works are important context
for agentic automation, but their main objects are simulation code, design candidates, laboratory actions, or research
workflows, not the selection of learned SciML surrogates using machine-checkable physics evidence on their predicted
fields.
The agentic workflows above draw on a broader LLM-agent literature. ReAct introduced interleaved reasoning and tool
or environment actions [40]. Multi-agent debate studies answer refinement through interaction [41]. CAMEL studies
role-playing communicative agents [42], AutoGen provides a framework for composing conversational multi-agent
workflows [43], and MetaGPT structures role-specialized collaboration through standardized operating procedures [44].
Reflexion uses verbal self-reflection over task feedback [45], and LLM-as-judge work studies model-based evaluation
and its biases [46]. This machinery helps systems propose, coordinate, critique, and evaluate candidates. By itself,
however, it does not establish whether a selected surrogate’s displacement, stress, or time-history fields satisfy the
physics required by the mechanics problem.
This question connects agentic SciML to the trustworthiness literature. One strand builds physical information
directly into model construction: governing-equation loss or likelihood terms can support label-free surrogate training
[47]. Hard-constrained physics-informed neural networks can enforce constraints in inverse design for topology
3

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
optimization [48], and conservation laws or other analytic constraints can be built into neural-network architectures
or loss functions [49]. Another strand analyzes trained neural networks after training. Formal-verification tools can
prove specified input-output properties or return counterexamples for supported ReLU or piecewise-linear networks
[50, 51]; adversarial-robustness work studies worst-case input perturbations and robust-optimization formulations
[52, 53]; and uncertainty-quantification methods estimate predictive uncertainty in neural SciML models, including
PDE and operator-learning settings [54]. Together, these areas show that physical constraints can be built into learning
and that trained networks can be checked, probed, or equipped with uncertainty estimates. What remains missing in the
agentic SciML discovery line surveyed above is a workflow that applies machine-checkable output-level physics checks
to each scored learned surrogate, separately searches the prescribed input set for large violations without reference
solution fields, and reports the selected surrogate using that evidence rather than only an aggregate reward, training loss,
or validation-error objective. The framework we present next addresses that gap.
3 Framework
Physics-Audited Agentic SciML ( PA-SciML) is a framework for discovering scientific machine learning (SciML)
surrogates for mechanics problems while reporting predictive accuracy separately from specified physics-check evidence.
Figure 1 gives a high-level overview and fig. 2 summarizes the full workflow; tables 1 and 2 list the LLM-mediated
roles and the fixed routines that score, check, and report candidates. The method is organized into three parts: the
Discovery loop, theVerification layer, andPost-discovery attributionwithMethod-card saving. Executability checks
withinCandidate searchand a complete run record run across all three, keeping execution failure separable from
predictive error and physics-check behavior. TheDiscovery loophas two parts: setup andCandidate search. The run
begins from user-specified problem information: the problem statement, data description, admissible input domain, and
scoring target. Setup reads that information and fixes the derived records used later, including the data summary,Fixed
evaluator, and, when auditing is enabled, physics contracts.Candidate searchgenerates, trains, scores, and records trial
surrogates in aCandidate search tree. TheVerification layerdefines the stated physics checks, applies them to trained
candidate outputs through thePhysics audit, and uses theSampled hard-contract gateto report a selected surrogate
under those checks.Post-discovery attributionandMethod-card savingoptionally test isolated edits associated with
score gains and save a reusable method card when the required checks pass; the candidate that produced the method
card is also recorded. Thus, LLM-mediated roles help explore surrogate designs, while fixed routines produce the
evidence used for scoring, physics checking, and final reporting.
Table 1: LLM-mediated roles in PA-SciML.
Role Purpose Role Purpose
Data analystSummarizes the available data and
problem context for setup.
ProposerSuggests candidate model changes
duringCandidate search.
EvaluatorDrafts the predictive scoring routine
that becomes theFixed evaluatorfor
comparing candidates.
CriticReviews proposed changes before
implementation.
MechanicianSelects supported physics-check types
and proposes their parameters, labels,
and tolerances from the supplied
problem statement and setup-generated
calibration evidence.
EngineerImplements proposed trial surrogates
and repair edits.
Root engineerBuilds the first trial surrogate from the
original specification.
DebuggerDiagnoses candidate failures for
bounded repair attempts.
RetrieverSelects at most one saved method card
when retrieval is enabled.
SelectorChooses which scored candidate to
extend next.
Result analystSummarizes candidate predictions,
scores, and physics-check evidence.
AblatorDecomposes improved changes into
isolated edits for fixed retesting.
DistillerDrafts a method card after the required
score and audit checks pass and the
candidate that produced the method
card is recorded.
4

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
Discovery Loop
LLM-mediated roles
propose, critique,
implement, and repair
trial surrogates
Mechanics Problem
Problem statement, data
and physics
requirements
Scoring + Physics
Audit
Fixed routine score,
successful candidates,
and audit trained outputs
Selected Surrogate
Reported separately
Predictive accuracy
Physics-check evidence
User
Iterate over candidates
Data / Setup input LLM-mediated role Fixed routine Reported output
Figure 1:High-level overview of PA-SciML.The user supplies a mechanics problem, data description, and physics
requirements. TheDiscovery loopuses LLM-mediated roles to propose, critique, implement, and repair trial surrogates.
Fixed routines score successful candidates and, when contracts are present, audit their predicted fields. The selected
surrogate is reported with predictive accuracy separated from physics-check evidence. Figure 2 expands this into the
full workflow.
Table 2: Fixed routines used to score, check, and report trial surrogates in PA-SciML.
Routine Purpose
Fixed evaluator Gives every successfully scored trial surrogate the same lower-is-better predictive
score.
Candidate validation and scoring
routine
Checks that a candidate exposes the expected interface and can run, applies
completeness and repair checks, trains it when possible, applies theFixed
evaluator, and records whether the attempt succeeded, so execution failure is not
confused with prediction error.
Physics AuditorApplies the configured physics checks to predicted fields and records the
maximum normalized violation,viol max, for audited candidates.
Sampled hard-contract gateReports the lowest-score audited surrogate that passes the sampled hard physics
checks; if none pass, the reported surrogate is marked unverified.
AdversaryOptional high-violation input search called after thePhysics audit; it keeps a
trained surrogate fixed and varies admissible inputs to report large physics-check
violations separately from theSampled hard-contract gate.
Numericist Runs advisory numerical probes for proposed model changes before full training;
these probes do not decide final reporting.
Method-card savingrule Check the required score improvement, the physics-check condition when
required, and the evidence record before a method card is saved.
3.1 Discovery loop
TheDiscovery loopconstructs and tests trial surrogate models under one scoring rule. The run begins from user-specified
problem information: the problem statement, data description, admissible input domain, and scoring target. During
setup, the workflow reads that information, prepares a data summary, and builds and saves theFixed evaluatorbefore
Candidate searchbegins. Here, fixed means that theFixed evaluatoris reused unchanged for candidate comparison; it
is not a formal guarantee that the saved file could not later be changed or that theFixed evaluatoris independently
correct. Predictive comparisons are therefore conditional on theFixed evaluatorand its validation data. Figure 3 shows
the setup andCandidate searchpath.
TheCandidate searchgrows aCandidate search tree. The root candidate is generated from the supplied problem
specification. Each later node is a child obtained by editing an already scored parent. The tree records lineage, status,
score when available, and links to detailed run artifacts; it is a record of surrogate-design history, not a finite-element
tree or a tree of solution fields.
TheCandidate searchseparates LLM-mediated design from fixed evidence production. For each selected parent,
theProposersuggests a candidate modification and theCriticreviews it before implementation. TheEngineer
implements the plan; when validation or scoring fails, theDebuggerattempts repairs. The workflow then validates
5

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
Discovery
Loop
1
Verification
layer
2
Post-
Discovery
3
User
spec+data
Setup
Data Analyst,
Mechanician, Evaluator
Saved setup
data summary
contracts, fixed
evaluator
Root
candidate
Retriever
method card
( )
Debate
proposer-critic,
implementation proposal
Numericist
advisory probe
Knowledge base
Candidate
search tree
Selector
parents to extend

Trained
surrogate
Physics auditor
sampled audit
Adversary (optional)
budgeted high-violation input search
Reported separately
adversary-report violation
(no reference solution needed)
Verified

UnverifiedFail
Pass
Ablator &
Engineer
Retrain
& score
Distiller
Method
card
Saving
checks
Saved artifact/
resourcesLLM-mediated role Fixed execution routine
select parents &
create children
saved contracts
approved setup
pre-train
Illustrative output
field
Optional path
scored candidate
not a gate input
Validate/train
scored with fixed
evaluator
record score
and audit summary
lowest score
among gate-
passers
fails the gate;
reported unverified
max normalized
violation
threshold?
Sampled hard-contact
gate
Figure 2:Audit-enabled PA-SciML workflow.From user-specified problem information, setup fixes the data summary,
theFixed evaluator, and, when auditing is enabled, physics contracts beforeCandidate search. LLM-mediated stages
propose, critique, write, and repair trial surrogates; fixed routines validate, train, score, perform thePhysics audit,
and, when enabled, run theAdversarybefore reporting the final selected surrogate. ThePhysics Auditorcomputes
sampled violmax, the maximum tolerance-normalized violation over active hard contracts. TheAdversaryis a separate
no-reference high-violation input search: it keeps the trained candidate fixed and varies only admissible inputs for
implemented hard-contract objectives. TheSampled hard-contract gateselects the lowest-score passing candidate, or
reports the lowest-score candidate as unverified if none pass. Soft diagnostics,Adversaryreports, and post-run reference
audits are recorded separately and do not enter the in-runSampled hard-contract gate. The workflow proceeds through
setup, candidate modification,Physics audit, optionalAdversaryreporting, selected-surrogate reporting, and optional
Post-discovery attributionplusMethod-card saving. A saved method card is written for retrieval in later runs, not the
current run; retrieval duringCandidate searchuses only method cards saved by earlier runs.
6

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
Discovery Loop
A. Setup
User
Problem
statement, data,
scoring target
Data
summary
Problem context
Evaluator
scoring interface
Fixed
evaluator
one lower-is-better
B. Candidate search
Candidate
search tree
Selector
parents to extend
Retriever
method card
Proposer, critic, engineer, debugger
debate, proposal, runnable candidate
Numericist
optional probe
Validate/train
scored with fixed
evaluator
Scored
candidate
candidate + score
Physics audit
if enabled
C. Candidate search tree
0
root
01
failed
00
scored
000
child
node Ids
encode the
path from the
root
Node record
id, parent, status, score,
lineage, audit summary
Scored parent to
extend
can take more children
Next selector call
can take more children
Fixed evaluatorLLM-mediated role Search tree recordFixed execution routine
same fixed evaluator
probe hook
record score; add audit fields if enabled
Figure 3:Discovery loop.Setup turns the supplied problem information into fixed run artifacts, including the
Fixed evaluatorthat supplies one lower-is-better score. DuringCandidate search, the workflow chooses scored
candidates to extend, optionally retrieves a saved method card, proposes a model change, writes or repairs the candidate
implementation, and runs fixed validation, training, and scoring with it. Optional numerical probes provide advisory
pre-training evidence; they are not physics checks and do not enter theSampled hard-contract gate. Successfully scored
candidates can enter theVerification layerwhen a contract file is present; fig. 4 separates the per-candidatePhysics
auditfrom the optionalAdversaryreport and reference-audit reports. Scores and compact audit summaries are stored in
theCandidate search tree; generated implementations and full reports remain in the run record. This path proceeds
through setup, candidate selection, method-card retrieval, scored-candidate creation, and tree update.
the implementation, trains the candidate, and scores it with theFixed evaluator. Validation checks that the candidate
exposes the expected prediction interface and that theFixed evaluatorcan compute a scalar score; completeness and
repair checks catch empty, truncated, syntactically invalid, or missing-entry-point implementations, and a candidate that
cannot be scored is not used as a parent for later edits. When the run has more scored candidates than it can extend
in the next iteration, theSelectorchooses which parents to extend while retaining the current best candidate when it
can still be extended by additional child candidates. TheRetrievermay supply one saved method card for the selected
parent; if no suitable entry is selected,Candidate searchproceeds without one. When enabled, theNumericistruns
advisory numerical probes before full training; these probes are not physics contracts and do not enter theSampled
hard-contract gate.
7

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
Candidate scoring and physics verification are separate. Without a contract file, the workflow can still score and compare
trial surrogates, but it does not report that the selected surrogate passed physics checks. With a contract file, recorded
physics-check results can inform later choices about which candidate to modify, while the final selected-surrogate claim
is governed by theSampled hard-contract gatedefined in the next subsection. These results do not change the debate
that produced the audited candidate. Instead, they are stored in the candidate record and summarized in later reports
for related candidates, so laterProposer,Critic, and, when retrieval is enabled,Retrieversteps can use the previous
physics-check behavior.
3.2 Verification layer
When auditing is enabled, problem-specific physics requirements are encoded as contracts. TheVerification layer
denotes the full set of choices and routines used to produce physics evidence; thePhysics auditis the fixed-code, per-
candidate execution of the sampled contract checks within that layer. A contract is a typed physics-check specification
interpreted by routines that are part of the framework implementation and supplied before the run. It is not executable
check code written by an LLM-mediated component or newly written for each candidate. The contract file selects a
supported check type and supplies its parameters, severity, and tolerance. Hard-contracts gate verified selected-surrogate
reporting; soft contracts are recorded only as diagnostics. The admissible input domain for audit is denotedZ. It is a
space of problem inputs, such as parameters or load histories, not the spatial body Ω and not a space of solution fields.
A verification setting fixes the contract file, hard/soft labels, tolerances, sampling protocol,Z, reporting threshold, and,
when enabled, theAdversarysearch settings. Unless explicitly qualified as anAdversaryreport or reference audit,
verifiedmeans passing theSampled hard-contract gatefor that setting. This is in-domain, contract-bounded evidence,
not a proof outsideZ. Figure 4 summarizes the in-runPhysics auditandSampled hard-contract gate, followed by the
separate optionalAdversaryreport and any post-run reference-audit reports.
In audited runs, a scored candidate is checked only when a valid score and contract file are present. ThePhysics audit
checks active hard contracts on finite probes drawn from, constructed within, or specified inZ. Skipped hard checks
are reported but excluded, so a pass is a pass over active, non-skipped hard checks. Audit failures do not count as
passes. After this sampled audit, the optionalAdversarycan run a high-violation input search for hard checks with
implemented search objectives and directly compute hard checks where implemented, without reference solution fields.
Disabling this search removes the separateAdversaryreport, but it does not change thePhysics audit, violmax, or the
in-runSampled hard-contract gate. Post-run reference audits are also separate verification settings and do not redefine
the in-runSampled hard-contract gate.
Contracts and theMechanician.Supported contracts cover check families implemented in the framework, such
as linearity or scaling, symmetry or antisymmetry, boundary or initial-condition consistency, output bounds, and
temporal-consistency checks. These families are not universal mechanics assumptions: the contract file should include
only properties valid for the governing regime, inputs, and outputs being audited. Shared names may have mode-specific
meanings, for example finite-dimensional parameter checks versus function-valued input checks. Appendix B gives a
catalogue of implemented checks.
During setup, an LLM-mediated setup component, theMechanician, drafts the contract file from the supplied problem
statement and calibration evidence generated before any candidate surrogate is trained. TheMechaniciandoes not write
executable check code; it chooses among the supported check types and proposes their parameters, hard/soft labels,
and tolerances, which are then interpreted by the fixed audit routines. Calibration estimates residual or scale levels
for available probes; it is not a constitutive fit and not a residual estimate for every possible contract. The workflow
prompts theMechanicianto choose tolerances no tighter than 3× measured calibration residuals when such residual
evidence exists. This 3× rule is guidance during contract proposal, not an automatically enforced validity guarantee.
Tolerances, hard/soft labels, and the input domain are therefore setup assumptions of the verification setting and are
archived for review.
BeforeCandidate searchbegins, theFixed evaluator, calibration outputs, and contract file are saved and reused during
Candidate search. Post-run comparison audits may rerun the in-run contract file or alternative files on existing selected
surrogates, but they do not validate calibration-to-tolerance choices. A check can be soft in one setting and hard in
another, so PASS/FAIL labels and rounded violations must be read with the contract file that produced them.
Fixed-code physics checks.ThePhysics auditruns no LLM-written contract-checking code. The trained surrogate is
the object under test: each check calls the candidate only through its input-output map, such as input parameters or load
histories in and predicted fields out. Thus the checking and aggregation logic are fixed, while the generated surrogate
implementation and learned weights are treated as the surrogate being audited. The resulting evidence concerns the
predicted fields under the specified checks.
8

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
Verification layer
VERIFICATION
LAYER
contracts • audit
• gate • reports
A. Verification settings (saved before Candidate search)
Mechanician
LLM-mediated setup role
contract file form problem + calibration
evidence, tolerances ≥ 3x residual
Verification setting
contract file, hard / soft, sampling
protocol, tolerances, admissible domain
, normalized-violation threshold,
optional Adversary settings
Saved setup
artifact
fixed evaluator,
calibration outputs,
contract files
B. In-run Physics audit and Sampled hard-contract gate
Trained surrogate
candidate
generated implementation,
saved weights
Physics audit
test active hard contracts on
samples against tolerances
Verified
lowest score that passes the
gate (in-domain on )
Unverified
lowest-score candidate;
no candidate passed the gate
Fail
Pass
Adversary (optional) After physics audit
search input for high violation, no reference solution needed
C. Separate optional reports (not part of the in-run gate)
Reference audit (post-run)
fixed reference contracts, cross run comparison
Reported separately from the in-run gate
adversary-report violation (no reference solution needed)
cross-run comparison table
Verification settingsLLM-mediated role Fixed execution routineCandidate under test Hard-contract gate
max normalized
violation
threshold?
Sampled
hard-contact
gate
Figure 4:Verification layer.The verification sequence starts when the LLM-mediatedMechanicianproposes a contract
file from the supplied problem statement and calibration evidence generated during setup; setup fixes one verification
setting beforeCandidate search; the trained candidate surrogate is held fixed; thePhysics Auditorcomputes sampled
violmax from active hard contracts; and the in-runSampled hard-contract gateapplies the configured normalized-
violation threshold. After thePhysics audit, the optionalAdversarycan perform a separate no-reference high-violation
input search; post-run reference audits can also re-check saved candidates under another contract file. These reports are
recorded separately from the in-runSampled hard-contract gaterather than aggregated into it.
For each active hard contractc, thePhysics auditapplies the check to a finite probe set Sc and computes a dimensionless
violationv c(q)for each probeq. The sampled hard-contract statistic is
violmax = max
c∈H
maxq∈Scvc(q)
τc
. (1)
whereτc >0 is the contract tolerance andH is the non-empty set of active hard contracts after skipped checks are
removed. A candidate passes theSampled hard-contract gatewhen violmax is no larger than the configured reporting
threshold. If no hard contract remains active, thePhysics auditreports noSampled hard-contract gatepass.
Physics Auditor,Adversary, andSampled hard-contract gate.ThePhysics Auditoris the fixed audit routine that
computes sampled contract results for scored candidates and stores compact audit summaries in theCandidate search
tree; full results remain in the run artifacts. It is not an LLM agent. The optional fixed high-violation search routine,
theAdversary, is called after thePhysics auditwhen enabled (fig. 5). Its search objectives and direct-check routines
are part of the framework implementation and are available only for selected hard-check types. It keeps the trained
surrogate fixed: the learned weights and biases are not updated. Here, bounded means that the search is restricted to the
prescribed admissible input domainZ: it varies only the input-side search variables z that parameterize admissible
probes and maximizes the corresponding contract violation vc(z). In the reported runs, this optimization seeds the
search variables from baseline samples and multiple starts, then raises the violation by constrained Adam ascent while
keeping the constructed inputs admissible. For parameter-vector inputs, the variables are normalized coordinates in
the prescribed box; for function-valued inputs, they are bounded mixture coefficients over admissible load histories.
9

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
Its objective uses surrogate outputs and contract conditions, not reference solution fields. Direct hard checks are
computed where implemented; hard checks without an implemented search or direct-check routine are not included in
the largest violation reported by theAdversary. The report gives the largest violation found under the chosen budget
and parameterization; it does not prove that larger violations are absent.
Fixed ingredients
Trained surrogate
weights + biases held
fixed
Admissible input
domain
parameter box or bounded
load-history mixture
Active hard
contracts
implemented search or
direct-check objective
Bounded optimization: search over prescribed
maximize surrogate held fixed
Seed search variables
Compute contract violation
baseline samples + multi-start
trained
surrogate
contract
condition
Constrained Adam ascent
raise keep inputs admissible
no reference solution
Largest violation found
worst input
value
Adversary report
separate input-search evidence,
not aggregated into sample
hard-contract gate,
largest found under the budget,
larger violation may exist
Iterate
under
budget
Figure 5:Adversary: a no-reference high-violation input search.When enabled, theAdversaryruns after thePhysics
auditas a fixed routine with no LLM-mediated step. It poses a bounded optimization, meaning a search over the
prescribed admissible input domainZ. The input-side search variablesz parameterizeZ, and the objective maximizes
the contract violationvc(z) while the trained surrogate is held fixed, including its learned weights and biases. Seeded
from baseline samples and multiple starts, constrained Adam ascent raisesvc(z) while the implementation keeps the
constructed inputs admissible. The objective reads the surrogate output against the contract condition, so no reference
solution is used. The roles are the opposite of training: training adjusts weights to reduce predictive error against
reference data, while theAdversaryadjusts admissible inputs to increase a physics-check violation. The search is
available only for hard-check types with an implemented search or direct-check objective. It reports the largest violation
found under the chosen budget and parameterization, recorded separately from theSampled hard-contract gateand not
aggregated into it, so a larger violation may still exist beyond the searched budget.
Values fromAdversaryreports, soft diagnostics, and post-run reference audits are reported separately from the in-run
Sampled hard-contract gate. At final reporting, an audit-enabled run selects the lowest-score candidate among those
with sampled violmax no larger than the configured threshold; if no candidate passes, it reports the lowest-score
candidate as unverified. The run may also report a Pareto front in the score and violation plane: among candidates with
both a score from theFixed evaluatorand a sampled violmax, the front contains those for which no other candidate has
both a lower score and a lower violation.
3.3 Post-discovery attribution and method-card saving
Post-discovery attributionasks whether a child’s score gain can be reproduced by one isolated edit afterCandidate
search. Figure 6 traces the optional path from an improving parent–child edge through single-edit retraining tests to the
checks that decide whether a method card is saved. A saved method card can be retrieved in laterCandidate search
runs.
The attribution routine, called theAblator, uses an LLM to split an improving parent–child code change into at most
K testable edits. For each parsed edit, theEngineercreates a parent-code variant containing only that edit, and fixed
routines retrain and rescore the variant under the sameFixed evaluator. For parent score sparent, child scoreschild, and
single-edit scores edit,i, defineg=s parent−s child and
ϕi = (sparent−s edit,i)/g. (2)
The largestϕi is reported as an operational share of the gain, not causal proof. The corresponding interaction residual is
a score-space diagnostic, not a governing-equation residual. Retraining noise and edit interactions can makeϕi <0 or
ϕi >1.
Method-card savingis independently enabled. TheDistilleruses an LLM to draft the method-card text only after the
required saving checks pass: a successful child with valid parent and child scores, sufficient relative improvement,
10

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
dominant single-edit share of at least 0.5, no existing method card for that candidate, and audit pass when required.
Fixed code validates required metadata, records the candidate that produced the method card and the supporting
evidence, and saves the method card.Adversaryreports are not part of theMethod-card savingrule unless explicitly
cited.
Post-Discovery
Parent
score sp
Child
score sc
improves
gain g = sp - sc
Ablator &
Engineer
split change into at
most (K) edits, and
write code for each
variant
Attribution summary
Retrain &
score
retrain each single
variant and score it
under fixed
evaluator
single-edit share = ; interaction residual
= gain not reproduced by dominant edit
(hurts) (beats child)
A. Post-discovery attribution
B. Method-card saving
Knowledge base
Saved method card
retrievable in later candidate
search
Saving checks
relative improvement ≥ threshold;
no existing method card;
dominant single-edit share ≥ 0.5;
audit passed when required.
No method card
Distiller
LLM drafts a
reusable method
card
Evidence
record
fixed code records
the candidate +
evidence
Fixed execution routineLLM-mediated roleCandidate under test Knowledge base update
dominant single-edit share (+ relative improvement) feeds the Method-card saving rule
any check fails
all
pass
0.5 threshold
Figure 6:Post-discovery attributionandMethod-card saving.The figure follows one improving parent–child edge
afterCandidate search. Because theFixed evaluatoris lower-is-better, the score gain is g=s parent−s child >0 .
LLM-mediated steps decompose the child change into at most the configuredK edits and create one parent-code variant
per edit; fixed execution then retrains and rescores each variant. Each bar reports an illustrative ϕi, the share of the
score gain reproduced by one isolated edit, and the dashed 0.5 line marks the dominant-edit threshold used by the
Method-card savingrule. TheDistillersaves a reusable method card only after the required score and audit checks pass
and the candidate that produced the method card is recorded. The method-card text is LLM-drafted, while fixed code
validates required metadata and adds a record of the supporting evidence and the candidate that produced the method
card. The post-discovery path follows the improved edge through edit decomposition, variant scoring, attribution, the
required checks, andMethod-card saving.
The in-run contract file and any post-run comparison contract file are separate verification settings. Likewise,Post-
discovery attributionprovides evidence rather than causal proof: ablation results show how isolated edits perform under
retraining, and any saved method card records the candidate it came from and the checks that supported saving it, so the
method card can be retrieved in a later search.
3.4 Reproducibility and traceability
Each run preserves a complete record: theFixed evaluator, the contract file when used, the search and audit budgets,
candidate lineage, candidate implementations, logs, scores, and audit summaries. This record is what lets execution
failure, predictive error, and physics-check behavior be told apart; the executability and repair checks described in
section 3.1 produce the failed-run status that the record distinguishes from a genuine physics pass or fail.
The record establishes only that a candidate ran and was scored; it does not establish physical validity. TheFixed
evaluatorprovides predictive-error evidence, while thePhysics auditprovides physics-check evidence by applying fixed
routines to contracts proposed during setup by theMechanician. Metric-parity checks can rerun theFixed evaluatoron
an archived candidate to verify score compatibility, but they do not provide evidence of mechanics. The numerical
examples specify domains, budgets, contract inventories, baseline definitions, and result values.
11

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
4 Numerical examples
4.1 Common setup and reporting
Each numerical example follows the same reporting protocol. We first specify the governing boundary-value or
initial-boundary-value problem, the admissible inputs, the solution field to be approximated, the reference data, and
the physical requirements used to check the predicted field. The inputs may be loads, source terms, boundary data,
material parameters, or load histories, depending on the problem. BeforeCandidate searchbegins (section 3.1), the run
fixes one lower-is-betterFixed evaluator; every successfully trained surrogate in that example is scored by this same
evaluator. When auditing is enabled, the run also fixes the physics-check specification for the stated verification setting
(section 3.2). Trial surrogates are then trained, scored, and, where applicable, checked under prescribed computational
budgets. The run record preserves the predictive score, the physics-check summary, and how each trial surrogate is
related to earlier attempts.
All predictive comparisons are within-example comparisons. A raw score in one problem should not be read against a
score in another, because each problem has its own field scale, validation data, andFixed evaluator. Physics claims
are likewise local to the check specification and verification setting that produced them. Post-run reference audits can
compare already trained selected surrogates under a common set of checks, but those audits are separate verification
settings; they do not change the liveSampled hard-contract gate, the pass or fail rule that compares each candidate’s
largest tolerance-normalized hard-check violation with a fixed threshold (eq. (1)). Each example therefore reports both
the predictive accuracy of the selected surrogate relative to reference solution fields and whether its outputs satisfy the
stated physical checks.
4.2 Parametric linear elasticity
The first numerical example concerns a small-strain, two-dimensional linear-elastic body occupying Ω = [0,1] 2. The
material response is parameterized by Young’s modulus and Poisson ratio. Letu= (u x,u y) denote the displacement,ε
the infinitesimal strain, andσ the Cauchy stress. In the absence of body forces, the static boundary-value problem has
the standard form
∇·σ=0inΩ,(3)
u= ¯uonΓ u,(4)
σ·n= ¯tonΓ t,(5)
where Γu and Γt denote displacement and traction boundaries and n is the outward unit normal. The small-strain
kinematics and isotropic constitutive relation are
ε(u) = 1
2

∇u+ (∇u) T
,σ=C(E,ν) :ε.(6)
Here C(E,ν) denotes the isotropic elastic stiffness associated with theE,ν material parameterization. The domain is
discretized on a fixed mesh of 2601 nodes. The loading is a uniform traction ¯t= (f x,f y) on the top edgey=1, where
fx is the tangential component andfy the normal component, each in [−0.3,0.3] . The material parameters vary over
E∈[5,20] andν∈[0.15,0.35] , and the left edgex=0 is traction-free. Roller supports fix the normal displacement
on the other two edges: the bottom edge has zero vertical displacement,uy = 0 ony=0, and the right edge has zero
horizontal displacement,ux = 0 onx=1. The tangential displacement component on each roller-supported edge is
free to slide and varies with the loads applied on the top edge. The finite-element reference data, surrogate output, and
validation target all contain both displacement components. The surrogate maps the four scalars z= (f x,f y,E,ν) to
the full displacement field u= (u x,u y) at the mesh nodes. Therefore, both roller conditions, ux = 0 on the right edge
anduy = 0 on the bottom edge, enter the physics checks. Figure 7 summarizes the domain, the top-edge traction, and
the roller supports.
The mechanics of this problem impose simple but important structure on the predicted field. For fixed material
parameters, linear elasticity gives traction superposition: the displacement produced by two applied tractions together
should equal the sum of the two separate displacement fields. For fixed traction and ν, scaling E by a factor c
should scale the displacement field by 1/c. The full displacement field should also reverse sign when both traction
components are reversed, and it should satisfy the two roller constraints. A scalar predictive-error score does not enforce
these properties. In this example, the reference audit is used primarily as a consistency check: it asks whether the
audit-enabled search preserves these linear-elastic requirements while matching the error-only comparison, not whether
the error-only selected surrogate is physically inadmissible.
Reference data and metric.The reference displacement fields are finite-element solutions on the fixed mesh described
above. The dataset contains 4000 training cases and 1000 held-out validation cases. The predictive metric is the mean
12

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
Figure 7:Parametric linear elasticity: domain and boundary conditions.The unit square Ω = [0,1] 2 is an isotropic
linear-elastic solid with material parametersE andν. A uniform traction ¯t= (f x,f y) is applied on the top edgey=1,
withfx the tangential andfy the normal component, each varying over[−0.3,0.3] across samples (red arrows show one
representative direction). The left edgex=0is traction-free and there is no body force. Roller supports fix the normal
displacement on the other two edges,uy = 0 on the bottom edgey=0 andux = 0 on the right edgex=1, leaving the
tangential component free to slide. The surrogate predicts both displacement components, so both roller conditions
enter the physics checks.
per-sample relativeL2 error of the full displacement vector (ux,u y) on the validation set (rel-L2, lower is better). This
Fixed evaluatoris saved beforeCandidate searchand reused unchanged for every comparison. Because relative error
can be sensitive when the reference displacement is very small, we also report percentile and worst-case errors.
Selected surrogate.The audit-enabled run selected a physics-structured DeepONet whose architecture carries the
linear-elastic structure of the problem by construction (fig. 8). The branch network receives only the Poisson ratio;
the traction components and Young’s modulus enter through the fixed compliance prefactorsfx/E andfy/E, which
multiply four branch heads, one pair per displacement component; and two coordinate factors that vanish on the roller
edges multiply the assembled output, as shown in listing 1. Consequently, load superposition and reciprocalE scaling
hold for any value of the trained weights; reversing both traction components reverses the predicted displacement field;
and the two roller conditions are satisfied identically. Training determines only the Poisson-ratio dependence of the four
head fields and the spatial basis supplied by the trunk. Concretely, the branch maps the normalized Poisson ratio through
three 256-wide tanh layers with a skip connection into four bias-free linear heads, each producingp= 64 coefficients;
the heads that couple fy/E toux andfx/E touy carry the Poisson coupling between the load direction and the
transverse response. The trunk evaluates 17 fixed features of the coordinates, nine polynomial and eight sinusoidal
terms, and passes them through a 256-wide residual network of three blocks with tanh activations into two bias-free
heads that supply 64 spatial basis functions per displacement component; each predicted component is the inner product
of its coefficient and basis vectors, multiplied by the roller factor and a fixed per-component output scale. The model
has about 6.3×10 5 trainable parameters. In mechanics terms, the model is a discrete superposition representation,
u= (f x/E)G x(ν) + (fy/E)G y(ν), with Gx and Gy learned unit-load response fields over the mesh. None of this
structure was prescribed: the problem specification fixes only the branch-trunk product form and the two-component
output, and the candidate search introduced the factorization at its first improving step, as the isolated-edit comparison
below records.
Physics checks.The physics checks encode these linear-elastic consequences as finite-sample tests on predicted
displacement fields. In the live audit-enabled run, the hard checks are load superposition, reciprocal E scaling, the
bottom-edgeuy condition, the right-edge ux condition, and sign reversal under load reversal; an amplitude bound
is recorded as a soft diagnostic. For the common post-run comparison below, the reference checks use four hard
requirements: load superposition, reciprocal E scaling, right-edge ux, and bottom-edge uy. Load-sign reversal is
reported separately as a diagnostic because, in this linear-elastic setting, it follows from the same linearity that gives
13

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
Figure 8:Selected surrogate for the parametric elasticity example: a physics-structured DeepONet.Blue boxes are
the trained networks; neutral boxes are fixed by construction and carry the linear-elastic structure. The branch turns the
Poisson ratio into four head fieldsA,B,C,D , and the fixed compliance prefactorsfx/E andfy/E assemble coefficients
that are linear in the loads, so, for any trained weights, load superposition and reciprocal-E scaling hold, and reversing
both traction components reverses the predicted displacement field. The trunk turns17fixed coordinate features, nine
polynomial and eight sinusoidal, into the spatial bases Φux and Φuy. After the coefficient-basis inner product, the roller
factors, (1−x) onux andy onuy, enforceux = 0 atx=1 anduy = 0 aty=0 identically, and a fixed per-component
scale sets the output amplitude. The assembled model is the discrete superpositionu= (f x/E)G x(ν)+(f y/E)G y(ν)
with learned unit-load response fields Gx, Gy, and has about 6.3×10 5 trainable parameters. Listing 1 shows the
corresponding listing.
Listing 1: Listing for the selected surrogate of the parametric elasticity example, showing the load and material
factorization. Input normalization, device handling, and output scaling are omitted. The branch sees only the Poisson
ratio; the loads and Young’s modulus enter through compliance prefactors, and coordinate factors impose the roller
conditions identically.
fx, fy = params[:, 0:1], params[:, 1:2]
E, nu = params[:, 2:3], params[:, 3:4]
fx_over_E, fy_over_E = fx / E, fy / E# loads enter only as fx/E, fy/E
A, B, C, D = self.branch(nu_norm)# branch input: Poisson ratio only
coeff_ux = fx_over_E * A + fy_over_E * B# linear in (fx, fy) by construction
coeff_uy = fx_over_E * C + fy_over_E * D# reverses sign when loads reverse
ux = einsum(’bp,mp->bm’, coeff_ux, trunk_ux_basis)# DeepONet inner product
uy = einsum(’bp,mp->bm’, coeff_uy, trunk_uy_basis)
ux = ux * (1.0 - x)# right-edge roller: ux = 0 at x = 1
uy = uy * y# bottom-edge roller: uy = 0 at y = 0
load superposition. The amplitude bound is also reported as a diagnostic. Thus, each pass/fail label and normalized
violation should be read together with the particular set of checks used to produce it (section 3.2).
Accuracy.On the held-out displacement fields, the selected surrogate from the audit-enabled run attains a rel-L2
of 8.864×10 −5. The error-only baseline, selected by predictive error alone with physics checks switched off during
Candidate search, reaches 2.103×10 −4. The selected surrogate’s worst validation case ( 1.376×10 −4) and 95th-
percentile error (1.249×10 −4) are also lower than the baseline values (3.376×10 −4 and 3.148×10 −4, respectively;
table 3). These values are a single-run comparison between two independently discovered surrogates, not a variance-
estimated accuracy claim. The selected surrogate and this error-only baseline were scored by the same held-out
relative-error evaluator. The validation error distribution of the selected surrogate is narrow, with mean8.864×10 −5,
median 9.331×10 −5, and maximum 1.376×10 −4 (fig. 9a). Figure 10 shows the displacement-magnitude fields
behind these numbers: in each case the displacement is largest near the top-left corner, where the loaded top edge meets
the traction-free left edge, and the predicted|u| is in good agreement with the reference from the 10th to the 90th error
14

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
percentile. The gain is consistent with the isolated-edit evidence reported below: the dominant improving edit is the
physics-structured factorization described above (table 5).
Physics verification.The physics checks test the predicted displacement fields directly for the linear-elastic structure
stated above; they use no reference solutions. Re-checking the same models against the common reference checks,
without retraining, shows that both surrogates pass the stated hard checks (tables 3 and 4). The normalized violations
are all at least two orders of magnitude below the pass threshold, and most are much smaller. The error-only baseline’s
largest sampled value comes from reciprocalE scaling, while the selected surrogate’s largest sampled value comes from
load superposition. These small quantities should not be read as a mechanically meaningful advantage of one model over
the other. Both correspond to raw residuals near the single-precision noise floor, well below each model’s own predictive
error, so the gap between them carries no physical information. For the selected surrogate, the checked properties hold
by construction, as described above, and the audit confirms that the exported trained model preserves them under the
reference routines. The error-only baseline likewise carries the loads linearly by construction and imposes the roller
conditions through boundary factors; its reciprocalE dependence is partly learned, and the training data reduce that
scaling residual to about 1×10 −5 in relative terms. TheAdversary, the separate no-reference high-violation input
search that holds each trained surrogate fixed and varies only admissible inputs, confirms that the largest violations it
finds remain far below the pass threshold for both models (fig. 5). Thus, this example is a no-failure verification case:
the audit documents that the more accurate selected surrogate still satisfies the stated linear-elastic checks, while the
decisive pass/fail contrast is provided by the transient example below.
Candidate search.The audit-enabled run generated 28 trial surrogates. All 28 were scored and audited; 27 passed
the liveSampled hard-contract gate, and the one failure is a degenerate candidate whose predicted field collapsed
toward zero, rejected with a normalized violation four orders of magnitude above the threshold. The error-only run also
generated 28 successfully scored trial surrogates, but physics checks were switched off during itsCandidate search.
The error-versus-violation plot in fig. 9b therefore summarizes the audit-enabled search: the selected surrogate is the
lowest-error candidate among those passing the live gate, while the single failed candidate has a score near one and is
not competitive by predictive error. In this example, the live gate does not change the low-error selection; it mainly
records that the selected surrogate satisfies the stated checks.
Isolated-edit comparison.An improving step in the candidate search usually changes several things at once, for
example the architecture, the training schedule, and implementation details. The isolated-edit comparison asks, after the
search, which single change mattered. This follows thePost-discovery attributionprocedure in section 3.3 and fig. 6;
the reported share is the single-edit quantityϕ i in eq. (2). Each improving step on the path to the selected surrogate is
split into its individual edits; each edit is applied on its own to the starting model of that step, and the resulting variant is
retrained and rescored under the same fixed metric. Four improving steps were examined this way (table 5). Only the
first gave a clear answer: replacing a generic branch network with the physics-structured factorization described above
recovers, by itself, more than the entire improvement of that step, which means the changes made alongside it were
neutral or harmful. This edit was saved as a method card, a reusable design note that later discovery runs can retrieve.
The three later steps did not reduce to one change: their edits improve the score only in combination, the leading edit of
one step worsens the score when applied alone, and the leading edits of the final two steps recover less than half of their
steps’ gains. We therefore treat only the physics-structured factorization as a reusable lesson from this example.
What this example shows.Taken together, the example teaches two things. First, the audit-enabled run reached
the more accurate surrogate in this comparison, and the physics evidence shows that this accuracy is not obtained by
sacrificing any stated physical requirement. Second, and independent of the accuracy outcome, the audit changes what is
known: both surrogates satisfy the stated linear-elastic checks, but without the audit that statement would be unavailable
for either of them, because a low predictive error alone says nothing about superposition, stiffness scaling, or the roller
conditions. The transient example that follows provides the complementary case, in which the same reporting protocol
exposes an accurate error-selected surrogate that violates a hard physical requirement.
4.3 Transient elastodynamics
The second numerical example concerns a thin rectangular linear-elastic body in the transient regime. The strip
Ω = [−0.5,0.5]×[−0.1,0.1] (length 1, height 0.2) has material properties that are fixed for every sample, Young’s
modulusE= 10 , Poisson ratioν= 0.25 , and densityρ= 1 in consistent units, and is discretized with second-order
triangular finite elements on a mesh with 4681 nodes. Starting from zero initial displacement and velocity, the solid is
driven by a prescribed motion of its right edge; the left edge is fixed, and the long edges are traction-free (fig. 11). With
the small-strain kinematics and isotropic constitutive relation of eq. (6), here under plane stress, the displacement field
15

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
Table 3: Parametric linear elasticity: held-out displacement-field error and physics verification of the selected surrogate
against the error-only baseline, re-checked without retraining under a common reference set of checks. Violations are
normalized so that a value at or below 1 passes; violmax is the worst hard-check violation, reported at sampled audit
inputs and in theAdversaryreport. Both rows pass this reference audit.
Surrogate rel-L 2 val. p95 val. max sampledviol max Adversaryviol max status
Selected surrogate8.864×10 −5 1.249×10 −4 1.376×10 −4 1.708×10 −4 2.087×10 −3 pass
Error-only baseline2.103×10 −4 3.148×10 −4 3.376×10 −4 1.080×10 −3 2.582×10 −3 pass
(a)
(b)
Figure 9: Parametric linear elasticity, selected surrogate diagnostics. (a) Distribution of the per-sample relative L2
error of the selected surrogate over the 1000 validation cases (mean 8.864×10 −5, median 9.331×10 −5, maximum
1.376×10 −4). (b) Predictive error against worst sampled physics violation for every successfully scored and audited
trial surrogate in theCandidate search, on logarithmic axes; the dashed line is theSampled hard-contract gatethreshold
(violmax = 1). The selected surrogate (star) has the lowest error among gate-passing candidates. The only gate-failing
candidate is also a high-error trial surrogate. Sampled violations of exactly zero are plotted at the axis floor of 10−6 so
that they appear on the logarithmic scale. Panel (b) uses live sampled audit values from theCandidate search; table 3
reports the separate common reference audit for the selected models.
u(x,t) = (u x,u y)obeys
ρ ¨u=∇·σinΩ×(0,T],(7)
u(x,0) =0, ˙u(x,0) =0inΩ,(8)
u=0on the left edgex=−0.5,(9)
u= ¯u(t)on the right edgex= +0.5,(10)
σ·n=0on the long edgesy=±0.1,(11)
withT= 2 and no body force. The prescribed motion ¯u(t) = (¯ux(t),¯uy(t)) translates the right edge as a whole: it is
uniform along the edge and varies only in time. The input supplied to the surrogate contains four time-series channels
sampled at 100 uniform steps overt∈[0,T] : the prescribed edge displacements ¯ux,¯uy and the corresponding velocity
channels. The displacement channels define the boundary motion; the velocity channels are the corresponding time
derivatives supplied as additional input information, not independent boundary conditions. The surrogate maps this
boundary-motion history to the full transient displacement field (ux,u y) at every node and time. Thus the surrogate
input is a sampled function of time, and inertia enters the balance of momentum.
Disturbances excited at the moving right edge propagate along the strip and reflect from the fixed left edge, so the
response at any node is a history-dependent superposition of traveling waves. Beyond spatial boundary and linearity
checks, this problem therefore adds a temporal requirement with no static analogue: causality. For a transient elastic
solid starting from rest, the displacement at timet may depend on the boundary motion up tot, but it should not depend
on motion prescribed later in the history. A surrogate trained and scored on complete trajectories can have a low mean
error while failing this forward-in-time requirement.
16

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
Figure 10:Parametric linear elasticity: displacement-magnitude fields of the selected surrogate.Reference
(top row) against selected-surrogate prediction (bottom row) of the displacement magnitude|u| over the unit square
Ω = [0,1] 2, for the validation cases at the 10th, 50th (median), and 90th percentiles of the per-sample relativeL2 error
(n= 1000 ); each column header gives the selected case’s error. The two panels of a column share one color scale,
with the power-of-ten factor above the bar. In every case the displacement is largest near the top-left corner, where the
loaded top edge meets the traction-free left edge, and the prediction is in good agreement with the reference across the
distribution, consistent with the narrow error distribution in fig. 9a.
Table 4: Parametric linear elasticity: per-check worst normalized violation under the common reference checks
(sampled audit /Adversaryreport). A value at or below 1 passes. Load superposition, 1/E scaling, right-edgeux, and
bottom-edgeuy are hard checks; load-sign reversal and the amplitude bound are soft diagnostics and are not included in
theAdversaryreport (n.a.).
Check severity selected surrogate error-only baseline
load superposition hard1.708×10 −4 /2.087×10 −3 9.46×10 −5 /3.03×10 −4
1/Escaling hard 0 / 01.080×10 −3 /2.582×10 −3
right-edgeux hard 0 / 0 0 / 0
bottom-edgeuy hard9.83×10 −15 /1.44×10 −14 9.87×10 −15 /1.45×10 −14
load-sign reversal soft † 0 / n.a. 0 / n.a.
amplitude bound soft † 0 / n.a. 0 / n.a.
†Soft diagnostic (does not gate).
Reference data and metric.The reference trajectories are transient finite-element solutions on the fixed mesh
described above, and the held-out validation set contains 500 load histories. Candidates are ranked by the fixed
accuracy measure for this example: the mean relativeL2 error over the complete displacement history and all mesh
nodes. Because the body starts from rest, the field norm is small at early times; relative errors there are less physically
informative than errors after the response develops. We therefore report the mean error together with the95th-percentile
and maximum validation errors. All accuracy and physics checks below use the same 500 validation histories. In the
post-run reference audit, both surrogates are re-evaluated with the same fixed accuracy routine; the recomputed mean
errors reproduce their discovery-run scores, confirming that the comparison uses one validation set and one accuracy
measure. The common reference audit uses only the physics checks reported below.
17

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
Table 5: Parametric linear elasticity: saved method card from the post-run isolated-edit comparison. The reported
fraction is the share of the corresponding step’s score improvement recovered by the isolated edit; values can exceed
100% when other simultaneous changes are neutral or harmful. Other improving steps were checked but did not produce
a reusable single-edit lesson.
Improvement step saved isolated edit share of gain
first improvement physics-structured DeepONet branch 149%
Figure 11:Transient elastodynamics: domain and boundary conditions.The thin strip Ω = [−0.5,0.5]×[−0.1,0.1]
is an isotropic linear-elastic solid in plane stress with material properties fixed for every sample,E= 10 ,ν= 0.25 ,
andρ= 1 in consistent units; only the loading history varies between samples. The left edgex=−0.5 is fully fixed,
ux =u y = 0 . The right edge x=+0.5 follows a prescribed time-dependent motion ¯u(t) = (¯ux(t),¯uy(t)) over
t∈[0,2] , uniform along the edge so the edge translates as a whole; the red arrows show the two motion components.
The long edgesy=±0.1 are traction-free, and the body starts from rest, with zero initial displacement and velocity. The
surrogate maps this right-edge motion history to the full transient displacement field(u x,u y).
Selected surrogate.The audit-enabled run selected a DeepONet with a causal load branch and a factorized space-time
trunk (fig. 12). The branch encodes the four input channels through a causal convolution: the history is padded on the
left, so the branch coefficients at timet see only the prescribed motion up tot, and the branch carries no bias, so the
response is linear in the load history and reverses sign when the prescribed motion is reversed. The output adds two
parts: a lifting term, linear inx, that carries the prescribed motion exactly on the right edge and vanishes on the fixed left
edge, and a learned correction multiplied by an envelope that vanishes att= 0 and on the left and right edges (listing 2).
Causality, load linearity, amplitude scaling, sign symmetry, zero response to zero input, and the two displacement
boundary conditions therefore hold by construction for any trained weights, and the zero initial state follows because
the envelope vanishes att= 0 and every admissible history starts from rest. Training determines the temporal kernels
of the branch and the spatial and temporal bases of the correction. Concretely, each displacement component has its
own single-layer causal convolution, a bank ofp= 32 learned kernels spanning the full 100-step window over the four
input channels; each branch coefficient is therefore a discrete hereditary integral of the loading history, the counterpart
of the Duhamel convolution that gives the exact response of a linear transient system driven from rest. The correction
basis is factorized per component: a spatial network maps the coordinates and their sinusoidal embeddings, with the y
frequencies scaled by the strip’s five-to-one aspect ratio, through two192-wide tanh layers into 32 spatial functions, and
a separate temporal network maps the time coordinate and its sinusoidal embedding through two 160-wide tanh layers
into 32 temporal functions; the space-time basis is their product. The model has about 2.0×10 5 trainable parameters,
and the prescribed motion enters the output twice, analytically through the lifting and causally through the branch.
None of this structure was prescribed: the problem specification fixes only the operator’s input-output form and leaves
the load-history encoder and the trunk decomposition open, and the candidate search introduced the causal branch
together with the factorized space-time representation at its second improving step, as the isolated-edit comparison
below records.
Physics checks.The physics checks reflect the linear transient setting: superposition and amplitude scaling of load
histories, sign symmetry, zero response to zero input, zero initial displacement, agreement with the prescribed right-edge
motion, causality, and an amplitude bound. The calibration evidence recorded before any surrogate was trained shows
that the initial displacement is exactly zero at every node and sample, and that the reference right edge tracks its
prescribed displacement channels to a maximum residual of 1.6×10−7, about 2×10−4 of the prescribed-motion scale.
The live verification setting treated five checks as hard: superposition, amplitude scaling, sign symmetry, zero output
for zero input, and zero initial displacement. It recorded midpoint causality and prescribed-right-edge consistency
18

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
Figure 12:Selected surrogate for the transient elastodynamics example: a DeepONet with a causal load branch
and a factorized space-time trunk.Blue boxes are the trained networks, one per displacement component; neutral
boxes are fixed by construction and carry the transient linear-elastic structure. The branches read the right-edge motion
history through left-padded, bias-free causal convolutions, so the coefficientsbux(t) andbuy(t) depend only on past
loading. They act as discrete hereditary (Duhamel) integrals, are linear in the loading history, and reverse sign when
the prescribed motion is reversed. The per-component space-time basis is the product Φi(x,y,t) =φ i(x,y)ψ i(t) of
32 learned spatial and temporal functions, giving the correctionri =b i·Φ i. The output assembly adds a lifting term
g=α ¯u, withα=x+ 0.5 , which reproduces the prescribed right-edge motion exactly atx=+0.5 and vanishes at the
fixed left edgex=−0.5, to the correction gated by the envelopeτ(t)β(x) , which vanishes att=0 and on the left and
right edges, so the correction cannot perturb the initial state or the displacement boundary conditions. Causality, load
linearity, amplitude scaling, sign symmetry, zero response to zero input, the zero initial state, and the two displacement
boundary conditions therefore hold for any trained weights. The prescribed motion enters the output twice, analytically
through the lifting and causally through the branches, and the model has about 2.0×10 5 trainable parameters. Listing 2
gives the corresponding listing.
Listing 2: Listing for the selected surrogate of the transient example, showing the causal branch and boundary structure.
Normalization and output scaling are omitted. Left padding makes the branch causal; the lifting carries the prescribed
right-edge motion and vanishes at the fixed left edge; the envelope vanishes att= 0and on the left and right edges.
x_pad = F.pad(load, (T - 1, 0))# left-pad: only past load values in view
b_ux = self.branch_ux(x_pad)# causal Conv1d, no bias: linear and causal
trunk_ux = phi_ux * psi_ux# factorized spatial x temporal basis
r_ux = einsum(’btp,tnp->btn’, b_ux, trunk_ux)# learned correction field
alpha = x + 0.5# 0 at fixed left edge, 1 at moving right edge
g_ux = alpha * u_bar_x# lifting: prescribed motion, exact at x = +0.5
envelope = tau * beta# zero at t = 0 and at x = -0.5, +0.5
ux = g_ux + envelope * r_ux
as soft diagnostics. The head-to-head comparison below uses a common reference set in which causality and the
prescribed right edge are hard, while sign symmetry is soft. This gives six hard checks, each gated at a 5% normalized
tolerance. Each check defines a dimensionless raw violation, for example a relativeL2 difference for superposition or
a response-normalized residual for the zero-input check, which is then divided by the check tolerance; Appendix B
catalogues the definitions. In the live run, causality was recorded but did not disqualify candidates. In the post-run
comparison, both selected surrogates are checked again with causality treated as a hard requirement; the causality
failure reported below comes from this common reference audit (section 3.2).
19

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
Accuracy.On the held-out transient displacement fields, the selected surrogate attains a rel-L2 of 2.629×10 −3,
against 2.724×10 −3 for the error-only baseline, about 3.5% lower; its 95th-percentile error (4.42×10 −3) and worst
validation case (5.48×10 −3) are also below the baseline values (4.90×10 −3 and 9.51×10 −3, respectively; table 6).
The per-sample error distribution clusters near the mean, with only a small number of larger-error cases up to that worst
case (fig. 13a). Figure 14 shows the field behavior behind these numbers: for a median-error case, the predicted and
reference displacement histories at the node nearest the strip center are in good agreement and both build up from
rest, consistent with the zero initial conditions (fig. 14a), while the final-time displacement magnitude, largest in the
interior of the strip, agrees from the 10th to the 90th error percentile, with visible discrepancy only in the hardest decile,
concentrated where the field carries the most spatial structure (fig. 14b). Enabling the physics checks therefore shows
no accuracy penalty in this comparison.
Physics verification: causality.Under the common reference set, the error-only baseline fails the reference physics
checks for a forward transient surrogate: its predicted response before a given time changes when only later boundary
motion is changed. The baseline uses a bidirectional load-encoding branch that reads the whole sequence, so early
predictions can depend on later boundary motion. It breaches three hard checks in theAdversaryreport: causality
(2750.62), load superposition (2.79), and the prescribed right edge (1.99), each above the normalized pass threshold of
1. The causality check is direct. It forms two boundary-motion histories that are identical up to the midpoint of the
time window and differ only after that time. A causal forward surrogate should then predict the same displacement
field before the midpoint for both histories. The error-only baseline does not. At sampled validation histories, the
pre-midpoint displacement field changes by about 63% in relativeL2 norm; with a 5% tolerance, this gives the sampled
normalized violation 12.62. The separate input search holds the trained surrogate fixed and varies bounded mixtures of
admissible load histories (fig. 5). It finds cases where the pre-midpoint response changes by more than one hundred
times its norm, giving the reported value 2750.62. This dependence on future boundary motion is not visible in the
mean error that selected the model.
The selected surrogate avoids this failure mode by construction, as described above: its causal branch cannot condition
on future boundary motion. Its causality, zero-input, initial-condition, right-edge, and sign-symmetry violations are
exactly zero under the reference routines, and its only nonzero values,4.5×10−6 sampled and 6.7×10−5 under search
on the load-linearity checks, sit at the arithmetic noise floor of single-precision superposition. The reference audit
therefore separates two surrogates with similar predictive error by a mechanics requirement that is essential for forward
transient prediction.
What the failure means.A surrogate whose present response changes with future loading is not a valid forward
model for settings in which the future load history is unknown. It is unsuitable for control, real-time estimation, or
what-if prediction, because the computed displacement at the current time would depend on boundary motion that has
not yet occurred. This failure is not apparent from a standard trajectory-error plot. When the complete load history is
supplied, the error-only baseline can match the reference trajectory with low mean error; a single predicted trajectory
does not show whether the same earlier response would be obtained if only the future part of the loading were changed.
The causality distinction between the two surrogates therefore comes from the physics check.
Candidate search.The search record is not the main evidence in this example, but it shows how often trial surrogates
ran to completion and satisfied the in-run physics checks. Two of the 16 trial surrogates exceeded the training-time
budget and did not produce usable scores. Of the 14 scored surrogates, 12 passed theSampled hard-contract gate. The
two in-run gate failures were trained surrogates with moderate predictive errors (scores 2.83×10 −2 and 6.25×10 −3),
but their largest sampled violations, 12.5 and 4.7, came from the zero-input check. In physical terms, each predicted a
nonzero displacement response for a body starting from rest under zero prescribed boundary motion; both also failed
checks that follow from linearity of the transient problem. Thus, the live audit removed physically inadmissible trial
surrogates duringCandidate search, although neither had a lower predictive error than the selected surrogate. Among
the surrogates that passed the in-run checks, the score-versus-violation plot mainly orders candidates by predictive
error (fig. 13b). The two timeout failures show that the compute budget remained an active constraint for this transient
example (section 3.4); section 4.4 discusses this limitation.
Isolated-edit comparison.Following thePost-discovery attributionprocedure in section 3.3 and fig. 6, with the
single-edit shareϕi defined in eq. (2), post-run analysis found one dominant edit in each of the three improving steps
leading to the selected surrogate, and theMethod-card savingstep saved a method card documenting each dominant
edit (table 8). The first improvement replaced the model with a linear-residual operator network whose output is linear
in the load history. Tested alone, this edit recovers more than the full score gain of its step and builds the load-linearity
and amplitude-scaling checks into the model form. The second step introduced a factorized space-time representation
together with the causal load branch, and the final refinement added per-component temporal bases with sinusoidal
20

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
Table 6: Transient elastodynamics: predictive error and physics verification of the selected surrogate against the
error-only baseline, re-checked without retraining under a common reference set in which causality is hard. All statistics
use the full held-out validation set (n= 500 ), and both means are recomputed by the same fixed routine, reproducing
the discovery-run scores. Violations are normalized so that a value at or below 1 passes. The accurate-but-acausal
baseline fails theSampled hard-contract gate, with a sampled causality violation more than an order of magnitude
above the threshold; entries printed as 0.00 are below table precision, the selected surrogate’s largest normalized value
being4.5×10 −6 sampled and6.7×10 −5 in theAdversaryreport.
Surrogate rel-L 2 val. p95 val. max sampledviol max Adversaryviol max status
Selected surrogate2.629×10 −3 4.42×10 −3 5.48×10 −3 0.00 0.00 pass
Error-only baseline2.724×10 −3 4.90×10 −3 9.51×10 −3 12.62 2750.62 fail
(a)
(b)
Figure 13: Transient elastodynamics, selected surrogate diagnostics. (a) Distribution of the per-sample relative L2
error of the selected surrogate over the full validation set ( n= 500 ) (mean 2.629×10 −3, median 2.628×10 −3,
maximum 5.48×10 −3); the error clusters near the mean, with a small number of larger-error cases up to the worst
case. (b) Predictive error against worst sampled physics violation for every successfully scored and audited trial
surrogate in theCandidate search, on logarithmic axes; the dashed line is theSampled hard-contract gatethreshold
(violmax = 1). As in the first example, the selected surrogate (star) attains the lowest error with no reported violation at
table precision, and nearly all trial surrogates satisfy the checks, so the tradeoff is governed mainly by predictive error.
The accurate-but-acausal error-only baseline of table 7 would lie far above the threshold. Panel (b) uses live sampled
audit values from the candidate search; table 6 reports the separate common reference audit for the selected models.
coordinate features suited to the oscillatory response. Each of these two edits reproduces roughly half of its step’s
score gain on its own. The causal branch requires one qualification: the isolated-edit share measures predictive-error
improvement, whereas the causality benefit is a structural property confirmed by the audit.
What this example shows.The two surrogates are nearly indistinguishable by mean predictive error, and the training
trajectories contain no signal against reading future boundary motion; only the causality check separates a valid forward
model from an inadmissible one. Under this reference verification setting, the physics evidence changes the reported
outcome in a way that no held-out error statistic in this example detected. Which requirements gate is part of the
verification setting (section 3.2): the live setting had recorded causality as a soft diagnostic, and only the reference
grading makes the failure disqualifying, which argues for review of proposed contracts; section 4.4 returns to this point.
This conclusion is single-run evidence under the stated checks and input domain.
4.4 Discussion and limitations
Taken together, the numerical examples support the central premise of the framework, and the asymmetry between
them is itself informative. On a linear static problem with several thousand clean finite-element solutions, error-driven
selection already produced a surrogate that passes the common reference checks. That conclusion is available only
because the surrogate was checked after the run: without theVerification layeror an equivalent post-run audit, the
baseline would be a low-error model whose behavior under the stated physics checks was unknown. In the audit-enabled
21

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
(a)
(b)
Figure 14:Transient elastodynamics: field behavior of the selected surrogate.(a) Reference (solid) and predicted
(dashed) displacement histories ux(t) and uy(t) at the interior node nearest the strip center, for the median-error
validation case (relativeL2 2.63×10 −3); the curves are in good agreement and both build up from rest, consistent
with the zero initial conditions. (b) Magnitude of the final-time displacement field |u| over the strip, reference (top
row) against prediction (bottom row), for the validation cases at the10th, 50th (median), and 90th percentiles of the
per-sample relativeL2 error (n= 500 ); each column header gives the selected case’s error, and the two panels of a
column share one color scale, with the power-of-ten factor above the bar. The prediction is in good agreement with the
reference across the distribution, with visible discrepancy only in the hardest decile; table 6 reports the corresponding
aggregate statistics and physics checks.
run, the audit supplied this physics-check evidence, did not reduce accuracy, and rejected one degenerate candidate
duringCandidate search, but it did not need to overrule the predictive ranking. On the transient problem, the post-run
reference audit exposed a failure that the mean held-out error did not: one error-selected surrogate responds to future
parts of the loading history. The value of explicit physics evidence is therefore not that error-only selection always fails;
it is that whether it fails depends on the governing regime and on requirements, such as causality, that the reported error
metric need not measure. The evidence must be produced and reported rather than presumed.
A second observation concerns what the candidate searches produced. In both examples the selected surrogate
satisfies the relevant checks by construction, and the constructions are classical mechanics representations: a discrete
superposition of unit-load response fields scaled by compliance prefactors in the static example, and a causal hereditary
integral of the loading history, the discrete counterpart of a Duhamel convolution, in the transient one. Neither structure
was prescribed; both were introduced by the search, and the isolated-edit comparisons associate them with the largest
score gains. The physics checks then play a different role than one might first expect: rather than catching a well-trained
but non-compliant selected field, they confirm that the saved surrogate carries its intended structure, and they document
the transient regime where that structure is decisive. This pattern, structure introduced by the search and checked by the
audit, is single-run evidence, but it suggests that machine-checkable physics requirements can favor architectures a
mechanician would recognize as principled.
Scope of a physics pass.A pass is a conditional statement: the trained surrogate satisfied the hard physics checks that
were specified for a particular verification setting. That setting fixes the contract file, tolerances, which checks are hard
22

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
Table 7: Transient elastodynamics: per-check worst normalized violation (sampled audit /Adversaryreport) for the
selected surrogate and the error-only baseline, recomputed on the full validation set. A value at or below 1 passes.
Zeros are exact under the reference routines; the selected surrogate’s only nonzero entries, on the two load-linearity
checks, sit at the single-precision noise floor. Under this common reference set the first six checks are hard and enter
theSampled hard-contract gate, while sign symmetry and the amplitude bound (daggered) are soft diagnostics that are
recorded but do not gate. Causality is hard here, although the live-run check specification had treated it as soft. n.a.
marks a check not included in theAdversaryreport, independent of its hard or soft status.
Requirement selected surrogate error-only baseline
load superposition4.5×10 −6 /6.7×10 −5 0.25 / 2.79
amplitude scaling2.2×10 −6 / 0 0.09 / 0.55
zero input, zero output 0 / 0 0.02 / 0.03
zero initial displacement 0 / 0 0.07 / 0.08
causality 0 / 012.62/2750.62
prescribed right edge 0 / 0 0.29 / 1.99
sign symmetry† 0 / n.a. 0.15 / n.a.
amplitude bound† 0 / n.a. 0 / n.a.
†Soft diagnostic (does not gate).
Table 8: Transient elastodynamics: isolated-edit comparison along the improvement path to the selected surrogate. The
reported fraction is the share of the corresponding step’s score gain reproduced by the single edit in isolation; it can
exceed 100% when the other simultaneous changes are neutral or harmful under retraining. Each listed dominant edit
was documented in a saved method card.
Improvement step dominant single edit single-edit share
first improvement linear-residual operator-network model 129%
second improvement factorized space-time representation with causal load branch 57%
final refinement per-component temporal bases with Fourier features 55%
and which are diagnostic, the admissible input domain, the sampling rule, and any high-violation input-search budget.
The reported pass or fail label comes from theSampled hard-contract gate, which checks the hard requirements at
sampled audit inputs (eq. (1)). If anAdversaryreport is also shown, it is a separate calculation: the trained surrogate is
held fixed, the input is varied within the admissible set, and the largest violation found within the finite budget is reported.
This search strengthens the evidence when it finds no larger violation, but it does not prove that no larger violation
exists. Requirements not written into the contract file are outside the claim, and hard checks without an implemented
input-search routine rely only on the sampled audit; these appear as not applicable in theAdversarycolumns. For this
reason, every pass/fail label and normalized violation value should be read together with the verification setting that
produced it.
Choosing the physics checks.The framework does not decide by itself which physical requirements should be used
as pass/fail checks. That choice is part of the mechanics setup. In the runs reported here, an LLM-mediated setup step
proposed the physics-check file from the supplied problem statement and from calibration evidence generated before
any candidate surrogate was trained. The file was then fixed for the run. The proposed checks, tolerances, and hard
or diagnostic labels should therefore be read as reviewable modeling choices, not as automatic evidence of physical
validity.
The two examples show why this matters. In the live transient run, causality was recorded only as a diagnostic check,
so a causality failure would be reported but would not disqualify a candidate duringCandidate search. In the common
post-run reference audit, causality was made a hard check, so the same type of failure becomes disqualifying. In the
static elasticity reference audit, load-sign reversal is kept as a diagnostic because it follows from load linearity in this
regime and is not counted as a second independent gate. Thus, a pass/fail label has meaning only together with the
check file that defines which requirements are hard, which are diagnostic, and what tolerances are used. The framework
saves the contract files, calibration outputs, sampled audits,Adversaryreports, and reference audits so these choices can
be inspected. Thus, reviewing the proposed physics checks is part of specifying the verification problem itself.
Limitations.The evidence has explicit limits. First, each comparison is one audit-enabled run against one error-only
run at a single random seed and fixed budgets. This single-seed scope reflects the cost of a discovery run, which is
twofold: the training compute for tens of trial surrogates, and the language-model usage that proposes, implements,
23

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
repairs, and reviews them throughout the search. Candidate search is nevertheless stochastic, so the observed accuracy
orderings are single-run observations, not stable properties of the method, and repeated runs with different seeds are the
most direct next check. Second, the audit-enabled arm differs from the error-only arm as a bundle: theVerification
layer, the advisory numerical probes run before candidates are trained, and the physics-check summaries available to
later candidate proposals all change together. The observed gains therefore belong to the workflow at the stated budget
rather than to any single component; rerunning the search with one component switched off at a time, for example
theSampled hard-contract gateor the probes, remains future work. Third, both baselines come from our own group
rather than from independent implementations: the elasticity baseline is the same workflow with verification disabled,
which is the intended controlled comparison, and the transient baseline is an earlier error-only run whose score the
post-run reference audit reproduces under the same fixed routine. Independent external baselines would strengthen the
comparison. Finally, the searches are modest, with 28 and 16 trial surrogates under fixed iteration budgets, and two
candidates in the transient example exceeded the training-time budget and were conservatively treated as failures; the
claims concern verification at the stated budgets, not the best surrogate a larger search might find.
Outlook.The natural next steps follow from these limits: repeated runs with different seeds to bound run-to-run
variation, and reruns with one framework component switched off at a time to separate the bundle; systematic accounting
of compute and language-model usage; independently specified and reviewed contract files; and broader mechanics
problems, including nonlinear constitutive behavior and three-dimensional domains, where linearity-based checks must
be replaced by regime-appropriate requirements. Other useful comparisons include data-poor variants of the same
problems and variants trained from governing-equation residuals rather than reference data, compared under identical
fixed evaluators; these would test whether the physics checks remain informative when the amount or type of training
signal changes. Method cards, the reusable design notes saved only when an improvement passes the required score and
audit checks, and retrievable in later searches, offer a mechanism for accumulating such evidence across problems;
whether reuse actually improves later searches is itself a testable claim for future runs.
5 Conclusion
This paper presents Physics-Audited Agentic SciML ( PA-SciML), an audit-enabled workflow for agentic SciML
surrogate discovery in mechanics. The workflow keeps creative model search separate from executable evidence:
trial surrogates are generated, trained, and scored by oneFixed evaluator, while fixed routines check the predicted
fields against machine-checkable physics contracts under a stated verification setting. Final reporting distinguishes low
prediction error from passing theSampled hard-contract gateand records separateAdversaryreports where available.
A discovered surrogate is therefore reported as verified against named checks, tolerances, and input domains, rather
than as plausible on the strength of a single accuracy score.
The numerical examples show what this distinction adds. In static parametric elasticity, the audit-enabled run reached a
selected surrogate with rel-L2 8.864×10−5, against 2.103×10−4 for the error-only baseline in these single-seed runs,
and both surrogates pass the common reference checks: the audit supplied a certificate at no accuracy cost, and the gain
traces to a physics-structured architecture identified by the isolated-edit comparison. In transient elastodynamics, two
surrogates separated by only a few percent in mean error, 2.629×10 −3 against 2.724×10 −3 on the full validation
set, differ decisively on a causality requirement. Under the common reference audit, the error-only baseline responds
to future parts of the loading history, with normalized violations of about 13 at sampled inputs and about 2750 under
theAdversarysearch; the selected surrogate is causal by construction and shows no reported violation. Post-discovery
analysis keeps reuse claims bounded in the same way: a design change is saved as a method card only when its gain
survives single-edit retraining and the required checks, and in the one example where saving was enabled, exactly one
change, the physics-structured branch, met that rule.
Agentic discovery platforms have shown that language-model agents can produce accurate SciML surrogates [10, 11];
the verification and reporting studied here address the complementary requirement of mechanics practice: adopting a
surrogate only together with stated physical evidence. The integration studied here, physics checks fixed at setup and
run on trained candidates, is by no means the final word; rather, it opens a design space in which agentic discovery is
verification-aware from the outset, with physical requirements shaping how candidates are proposed and trained, not
only how they are audited and reported. We expect explicit physics reporting of this kind to become a precondition for
using discovered surrogates in engineering analysis.
Acknowledgements
This work was partially supported by the Sand Hazards and Opportunities for Resilience, Energy, and Sustainability
(SHORES) Center, funded by Tamkeen under the NYUAD Research Institute Award CG013. The authors would also
24

Physics-Audited Agentic SciMLA PREPRINT
like to acknowledge the support of the NYUAD Center for Research Computing for providing resources, services, and
skilled personnel.
