record_id: arxiv:2308.00352
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2308.00352
fetched_title: METAGPT: M ETA PROGRAMMING FOR A MULTI-AGENT COLLABORATIVE FRAMEWORK
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T18:59:42Z

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
METAGPT: M ETA PROGRAMMING FOR A
MULTI-AGENT COLLABORATIVE FRAMEWORK
Sirui Hong1∗, Mingchen Zhuge2∗, Jiaqi Chen1, Xiawu Zheng3, Yuheng Cheng4,
Ceyao Zhang4, Jinlin Wang1, Zili Wang, Steven Ka Shing Yau5, Zijuan Lin4,
Liyang Zhou6, Chenyu Ran1, Lingfeng Xiao1,7, Chenglin Wu1†, J¨urgen Schmidhuber2,8
1DeepWisdom, 2AI Initiative, King Abdullah University of Science and Technology,
3Xiamen University, 4The Chinese University of Hong Kong, Shenzhen,
5Nanjing University, 6University of Pennsylvania,
7University of California, Berkeley, 8The Swiss AI Lab IDSIA/USI/SUPSI
ABSTRACT
Remarkable progress has been made on automated problem solving through so-
cieties of agents based on large language models (LLMs). Existing LLM-based
multi-agent systems can already solve simple dialogue tasks. Solutions to more
complex tasks, however, are complicated through logic inconsistencies due to
cascading hallucinations caused by naively chaining LLMs. Here we introduce
MetaGPT, an innovative meta-programming framework incorporating efficient
human workflows into LLM-based multi-agent collaborations. MetaGPT en-
codes Standardized Operating Procedures (SOPs) into prompt sequences for more
streamlined workflows, thus allowing agents with human-like domain expertise
to verify intermediate results and reduce errors. MetaGPT utilizes an assembly
line paradigm to assign diverse roles to various agents, efficiently breaking down
complex tasks into subtasks involving many agents working together. On col-
laborative software engineering benchmarks, MetaGPT generates more coherent
solutions than previous chat-based multi-agent systems. Our project can be found
at https://github.com/geekan/MetaGPT.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Autonomous agents utilizing Large Language Models (LLMs) offer promising opportunities to en-
hance and replicate human workflows. In real-world applications, however, existing systems (Park
et al., 2023; Zhuge et al., 2023; Cai et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023c; Li et al., 2023; Du et al., 2023;
Liang et al., 2023; Hao et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023b) tend to oversimplify the complexities. They
struggle to achieve effective, coherent, and accurate problem-solving processes, particularly when
there is a need for meaningful collaborative interaction (Chen et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2023a; Dong
et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023a; Qian et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023b; Hong et al., 2024).
Through extensive collaborative practice, humans have developed widely accepted Standardized
Operating Procedures (SOPs) across various domains (Belbin, 2012; Manifesto, 2001; DeMarco &
Lister, 2013). These SOPs play a critical role in supporting task decomposition and effective coor-
dination. Furthermore, SOPs outline the responsibilities of each team member, while establishing
standards for intermediate outputs. Well-defined SOPs improve the consistent and accurate exe-
cution of tasks that align with defined roles and quality standards (Belbin, 2012; Manifesto, 2001;
DeMarco & Lister, 2013; Wooldridge & Jennings, 1998). For instance, in a software company,
Product Managers analyze competition and user needs to create Product Requirements Documents
(PRDs) using a standardized structure, to guide the developmental process.
Inspired by such ideas, we design a promising GPT -based Meta-Programming framework called
MetaGPT that significantly benefits from SOPs. Unlike other works (Li et al., 2023; Qian et al.,
2023), MetaGPT requires agents to generate structured outputs, such as high-quality requirements
∗These authors contributed equally to this work.
†Chenglin Wu (alexanderwu@fuzhi.ai) is the corresponding author, affiliated with DeepWisdom.
1
arXiv:2308.00352v7 [cs.AI] 1 Nov 2024

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Figure 1: The software development SOPs between MetaGPT and real-world human teams.
In software engineering, SOPs promote collaboration among various roles. MetaGPT showcases
its ability to decompose complex tasks into specific actionable procedures assigned to various roles
(e.g., Product Manager, Architect, Engineer, etc.).
documents, design artifacts, flowcharts, and interface specifications. The use of intermediate struc-
tured outputs significantly increases the success rate of target code generation. Because it helps
maintain consistency in communication, minimizing ambiguities and errors during collaboration.
More graphically, in a company simulated by MetaGPT, all employees follow a strict and stream-
lined workflow, and all their handovers must comply with certain established standards. This reduces
the risk of hallucinations caused by idle chatter between LLMs, particularly in role-playing frame-
works, like: “ Hi, hello and how are you?” – Alice (Product Manager); “ Great! Have you had
lunch?” – Bob (Architect).
Benefiting from SOPs, MetaGPT offers a promising approach to meta-programming. In this context,
we adopt meta-programming1 as ”programming to program”, in contrast to the broader fields of meta
learning and ”learning to learn” (Schmidhuber, 1987; 1993a; Hochreiter et al., 2001; Schmidhuber,
2006; Finn et al., 2017).
This notion of meta-programming also encompasses earlier efforts like CodeBERT (Feng et al.,
2020) and recent projects such as CodeLlama (Rozi `ere et al., 2023) and WizardCoder (Luo
et al., 2023). However, MetaGPT stands out as a unique solution that allows for efficient meta-
programming through a well-organized group of specialized agents. Each agent has a specific role
and expertise, following some established standards. This allows for automatic requirement analysis,
system design, code generation, modification, execution, and debugging during runtime, highlight-
ing how agent-based techniques can enhance meta-programming.
To validate the design of MetaGPT, we use publicly available HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021a) and
MBPP (Austin et al., 2021) for evaluations. Notably, in code generation benchmarks, MetaGPT
achieves a new state-of-the-art (SoTA) with 85.9% and 87.7% in Pass@1. When compared to other
popular frameworks for creating complex software projects, such as AutoGPT (Torantulino et al.,
2023), LangChain (Chase, 2022), AgentVerse (Chen et al., 2023), and ChatDev (Qian et al., 2023).
MetaGPT also stands out in handling higher levels of software complexity and offering extensive
functionality. Remarkably, in our experimental evaluations, MetaGPT achieves a 100% task com-
pletion rate, demonstrating the robustness and efficiency (time and token costs) of our design.
We summarize our contributions as follows:
1https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Metaprogramming
2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
• We introduce MetaGPT, a meta-programming framework for multi-agent collaboration based on
LLMs. It is highly convenient and flexible, with well-defined functions like role definition and
message sharing, making it a useful platform for developing LLM-based multi-agent systems.
• Our innovative integration of human-like SOPs throughout MetaGPT’s design significantly en-
hances its robustness, reducing unproductive collaboration among LLM-based agents. Furthermore,
we introduce a novel executive feedback mechanism that debugs and executes code during runtime,
significantly elevating code generation quality (e.g., 5.4% absolute improvement on MBPP).
• We achieve state-of-the-art performance on HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021a) and MBPP (Austin
et al., 2021). Extensive results convincingly validate MetaGPT, suggesting that it is a promising
meta-programming framework for developing LLM-based multi-agent systems.
2 R ELATED WORK
Automatic Programming The roots of automatic programming reach back deep into the previ-
ous century. In 1969, Waldinger & Lee (1969) introduced “PROW,” a system designed to accept
program specifications written in predicate calculus, generate algorithms, and create LISP imple-
mentations (McCarthy, 1978). Balzer (1985) and Soloway (1986) made efforts to advance automatic
programming and identified potential methods to achieve it. Recent approaches use natural language
processing (NLP) techniques (Ni et al., 2023; Skreta et al., 2023; Feng et al., 2020; Li et al., 2022;
Chen et al., 2018; 2021b; Zhang et al., 2023a; Liu et al., 2023b; Tang et al., 2023a; Muennighoff
et al., 2023). Automatic programming has grown into an industry delivering paid functions such
as Microsoft Copilot. Lately, LLMs-based agents (Yao et al., 2022; Shinn et al., 2023; Lin et al.,
2023) have advanced automatic programming development. Among them, ReAct (Yao et al., 2022)
and Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) utilize a chain of thought prompts (Wei et al., 2022) to generate
reasoning trajectories and action plans with LLMs. Both works demonstrate the effectiveness of
the ReAct style loop of reasoning as a design paradigm for empowering automatic programming.
Additionally, ToolFormer (Schick et al., 2023) and ToolLLM (Qin et al., 2023) can learn how to use
external tools through simple APIs. The research most closely aligned with our work by Li et al.
(2023) proposes a straightforward role-play framework for programming that involves communica-
tion between agents playing different roles. Qian et al. (2023) utilizes multiple agents for software
development. Although existing papers (Li et al., 2023; Qian et al., 2023) have improved productiv-
ity, they have not fully tapped into effective workflows with structured output formats. This makes
it harder to deal with complex software engineering issues.
LLM-Based Multi-Agent Frameworks Recently, LLM-based autonomous agents have gained
tremendous interest in both industry and academia (Wang et al., 2023b; Zhou et al., 2023b; Zhang
et al., 2023b). Many works (Chen et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2023c; Du et al., 2023; Zhuge et al.,
2023; Hao et al., 2023; Akata et al., 2023; Tang et al., 2023b) have improved the problem-solving
abilities of LLMs by integrating discussions among multiple agents. Stable-Alignment (Liu et al.,
2023a) creates instruction datasets by deriving consensus on value judgments through interactions
across a sandbox with LLM agents. Other works focus on sociological phenomena. For example,
Generative Agents (Park et al., 2023) creates a “town” of 25 agents to study language interaction,
social understanding, and collective memory. In the Natural Language-Based Society of Mind (NL-
SOM) (Zhuge et al., 2023), agents with different functions interact to solve complex tasks through
multiple rounds of “mindstorms.” Cai et al. (2023) propose a model for cost reduction by combining
large models as tool makers and small models as tool users.
Some works emphasize cooperation and competition related to planning and strategy (Bakhtin et al.,
2022); others propose LLM-based economies (Zhuge et al., 2023). These works focus on open-
world human behavior simulation, while MetaGPT aims to introduce human practice into multi-
agents frameworks. Besides, LLM-based agents face the challenges of “assistant repeated instruc-
tion” or “infinite loop of message” (Talebirad & Nadiri, 2023; Li et al., 2023). These challenges
become more urgent in task-oriented collaborations, which require consistent and mutually benefi-
cial interactions (Elazar et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022; Jiang et al., 2023). This motivates our focus
on applying advanced concepts such as Standard Operating Procedures in software development to
multi-agent frameworks.
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Figure 2: An example of the communication protocol (left) and iterative programming with exe-
cutable feedback (right). Left: Agents use a shared message pool to publish structured messages.
They can also subscribe to relevant messages based on their profiles. Right: After generating the
initial code, the Engineer agent runs and checks for errors. If errors occur, the agent checks past
messages stored in memory and compares them with the PRD, system design, and code files.
3 M ETAGPT: A M ETA-PROGRAMMING FRAMEWORK
MetaGPT is a meta-programming framework for LLM-based multi-agent systems. Sec. 3.1 pro-
vides an explanation of role specialization, workflow and structured communication in this frame-
work, and illustrates how to organize a multi-agent system within the context of SOPs. Sec. 3.2
presents a communication protocol that enhances role communication efficiency. We also imple-
ment structured communication interfaces and an effective publish-subscribe mechanism. These
methods enable agents to obtain directional information from other roles and public information
from the environment. Finally, we introduce executable feedback—a self-correction mechanism for
further enhancing code generation quality during run-time in Sec. 3.3.
3.1 A GENTS IN STANDARD OPERATING PROCEDURES
Specialization of Roles Unambiguous role specialization enables the breakdown of complex work
into smaller and more specific tasks. Solving complex tasks or problems often requires the collab-
oration of agents with diverse skills and expertise, each contributing specialized outputs tailored to
specific issues.
In a software company, a Product Manager typically conducts business-oriented analysis and derives
insights, while a software engineer is responsible for programming. We define five roles in our
software company: Product Manager, Architect, Project Manager, Engineer, and QA Engineer, as
shown in Figure 1. In MetaGPT, we specify the agent’s profile, which includes their name, profile,
goal, and constraints for each role. We also initialize the specific context and skills for each role.
For instance, a Product Manager can use web search tools, while an Engineer can execute code, as
shown in Figure 2. All agents adhere to the React-style behavior as described in Yao et al. (2022).
Every agent monitors the environment ( i.e., the message pool in MetaGPT) to spot important ob-
servations (e.g.,, messages from other agents). These messages can either directly trigger actions or
assist in finishing the job.
Workflow across Agents By defining the agents’ roles and operational skills, we can establish
basic workflows. In our work, we follow SOP in software development, which enables all agents to
work in a sequential manner.
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Figure 3: A diagram showing the software development process in MetaGPT, emphasizing its sig-
nificant dependence on SOPs. The more detailed demonstration can be found in Appendix B.
Specifically, as shown in Figure 1, upon obtaining user requirements, the Product Manager under-
takes a thorough analysis, formulating a detailed PRD that includes User Stories and Requirement
Pool. This serves as a preliminary functional breakdown. The structured PRD is then passed to
the Architect, who translates the requirements into system design components, such as File Lists,
Data Structures, and Interface Definitions. Once captured in the system design, the information is
directed towards the Project Manager for task distribution. Engineers proceed to execute the des-
ignated classes and functions as outlined (detailed in Figure 2). In the following stage, the QA
Engineer formulates test cases to enforce stringent code quality. In the final step, MetaGPT pro-
duces a meticulously crafted software solution. We provide a detailed schematic (Figure 3) and a
concrete instance (Appendix B) of the SOP workflow in MetaGPT.
3.2 C OMMUNICATION PROTOCOL
Structured Communication Interfaces Most current LLM-based multi-agent frameworks (Li
et al., 2023; Zhuge et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023a; Park et al., 2023) utilize unconstrained natural
language as a communication interface.
However, despite the versatility of natural language, a question arises: does pure natural language
communication suffice for solving complex tasks? For example, in the telephone game (or Chinese
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
whispers)2, after several rounds of communication, the original information may be quite distorted.
Inspired by human social structures, we propose using structured communication to formulate the
communication of agents. We establish a schema and format for each role and request that individ-
uals provide the necessary outputs based on their specific role and context.
As shown in Figure 3, the Architect agent generates two outputs: the system interface design and a
sequence flow diagram. These contain system module design and interaction sequences, which serve
as important deliverables for Engineers. Unlike ChatDev (Zhao et al., 2023), agents in MetaGPT
communicate through documents and diagrams (structured outputs) rather than dialogue. These
documents contain all necessary information, preventing irrelevant or missing content.
Publish-Subscribe Mechanism Sharing information is critical in collaboration. For instance,
Architects and Engineers often need to reference PRDs. However, communicating this information
each time in a one-to-one manner, as indicated by previous work (Li et al., 2023; Zhao et al., 2023;
Zhang et al., 2023a), can complicate the communication topology, resulting in inefficiencies.
To address this challenge, a viable approach is to store information in a global message pool. As
shown in Figure 2 (left), we introduce a shared message pool that allows all agents to exchange
messages directly. These agents not onlypublish their structured messages in the pool but also access
messages from other entities transparently. Any agent can directly retrieve required information
from the shared pool, eliminating the need to inquire about other agents and await their responses.
This enhances communication efficiency.
Sharing all information with every agent can lead to information overload. During task execution,
an agent typically prefers to receive only task-related information and avoid distractions through
irrelevant details. Effective management and dissemination of this information play a crucial role.
We offer a simple and effective solution- subscription mechanism (in Figure 2 (left)). Instead of
relying on dialogue, agents utilize role-specific interests to extract relevant information. They can
select information to follow based on their role profiles. In practical implementations, an agent
activates its action only after receiving all its prerequisite dependencies. As illustrated in Figure 3,
the Architect mainly focuses on PRDs provided by the Product Manager, while documents from
roles such as the QA Engineer might be of lesser concern.
3.3 I TERATIVE PROGRAMMING WITH EXECUTABLE FEEDBACK
In daily programming tasks, the processes of debugging and optimization play important roles.
However, existing methods often lack a self-correction mechanism, which leads to unsuccessful code
generation. Previous work introduced non-executable code review and self-reflection (Zhao et al.,
2023; Yao et al., 2022; Shinn et al., 2023; Dong et al., 2023). However, they still face challenges in
ensuring code executability and runtime correctness.
Our first MetaGPT implementations overlooked certain errors during the review process, due to
LLM hallucinations (Manakul et al., 2023). To overcome this, after initial code generation, we
introduce an executable feedback mechanism to improve the code iteratively. More specifically, as
shown in Figure 2, the Engineer is asked to write code based on the original product requirements
and design.
This enables the Engineer to continuously improve code using its own historical execution and
debugging memory. To obtain additional information, the Engineer writes and executes the corre-
sponding unit test cases, and subsequently receives the test results. If satisfactory, additional devel-
opment tasks are initiated. Otherwise the Engineer debugs the code before resuming programming.
This iterative testing process continues until the test is passed or a maximum of 3 retries is reached.
4 E XPERIMENTS
4.1 E XPERIMENTAL SETTING
Datasets We use two public benchmarks, HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021a) and MBPP (Austin
et al., 2021), and a self-generated, more challenging software development benchmark named Soft-
2https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Chinese whispers
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
wareDev: (1) HumanEval includes 164 handwritten programming tasks. These tasks encompass
function specifications, descriptions, reference codes, and tests. (2) MBPP consists of 427 Python
tasks. These tasks cover core concepts and standard library features and include descriptions, ref-
erence codes, and automated tests. (3) Our SoftwareDev dataset is a collection of 70 representa-
tive examples of software development tasks, each with its own task prompt (see Table 8). These
tasks have diverse scopes (See Figure 5), such as mini-games, image processing algorithms, data
visualization. They offer a robust testbed for authentic development tasks. Contrary to previous
datasets (Chen et al., 2021a; Austin et al., 2021), SoftwareDev focuses on the engineering aspects.
In the comparisons, we randomly select seven representative tasks for evaluation.
Evaluation Metrics For HuamnEval and MBPP, we follow the unbiased version of Pass @k as
presented by (Chen et al., 2021a; Dong et al., 2023), to evaluate the functional accuracy of the top-k
generated codes: Pass @k = EProblems

1 − (
n−c
k )
(
n
k)

.
For SoftwareDev, we prioritize practical use and evaluate performance through human evaluations
(A, E) or statistical analysis (B, C, D): (A) Executability: this metric rates code from 1 (failure/non-
functional) to 4 (flawless). ‘1’ is for non-functional, ‘2’ for runnable but imperfect, ‘3’ for nearly
perfect, and ‘4’ for flawless code. (B) Cost: the cost evaluations here include the (1) running time,
(2) token usage, and (3) expenses. (C) Code Statistics: this includes (1) code files, (2) lines of code
per file, and (3) total code lines. (D) Productivity: basically, it is defined as the number of token
usage divided by the number of lines of code, which refers to the consumption of tokens per code
line. (E) Human Revision Cost: refers to times of manual code corrections, which tackle problems
like package import errors, incorrect class names, or incomplete reference paths. Typically, each
correction involves up to 3 lines of code.
Baselines We compare our method with recent domain-specific LLMs in the code generation field,
including AlphaCode (Li et al., 2022), Incoder (Fried et al., 2022), CodeGeeX (Zheng et al., 2023),
CodeGen (Nijkamp et al., 2023), CodeX (Chen et al., 2021a), and CodeT (Chen et al., 2022) and
general domain LLMs such as PaLM (Chowdhery et al., 2022), and GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023). Several
results of baselines (such as Incoder, CodeGeeX) are provided by Dong et al. (2023). In HumanEval
and MBPP, we slightly modified the prompts to align with response format requirements. These
modifications aim to address format-specific issues (i.e., Python problems). With the SoftwareDev
benchmark, we provide a comprehensive comparison between MetaGPT, AutoGPT (Torantulino
et al., 2023), LangChain (Chase, 2022) with Python Read-Eval-Print Loop (REPL) tool 3, Agent-
Verse (Chen et al., 2023), and ChatDev (Qian et al., 2023).
4.2 M AIN RESULT
AlphaCode(1.1B)
Incoder (6.7B)
CodeGeeX (13B)
17.1
—
15.2 17.6 18.9
26.9
CodeGeeX-Mono(16.1B)
32.9 38.6
GPT
-4
67.0
—
MetaGPT
(w/o Feedback)
81.7 82.3
Pass@1 of MBPP and HumanEval (%)
PaLM Coder(540B)
36.0
47.0
Codex (175B)
47.0
58.1
Codex + CodeT
65.8 67.7
HumanEval
MBPP
MetaGPT
85.9 87.7
Figure 4: Pass rates on the MBPP and HumanEval with a single attempt.
Performance Figure 4 demonstrates that MetaGPT outperforms all preceding approaches in both
HumanEval and MBPP benchmarks. When MetaGPT collaborates with GPT-4, it significantly im-
proves the Pass @k in the HumanEval benchmark compared to GPT-4. It achieves 85.9% and 87.7%
3https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Read–eval–print loop
7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Figure 5: Demo softwares developed by MetaGPT.
in these two public benchmarks. Moreover, as shown in Table 1, MetaGPT outperforms ChatDev on
the challenging SoftwareDev dataset in nearly all metrics. For example, considering the executabil-
ity, MetaGPT achieves a score of 3.75, which is very close to 4 (flawless). Besides, it takes less time
(503 seconds), clearly less than ChatDev. Considering the code statistic and the cost of human revi-
sion, it also significantly outperforms ChatDev. Although MetaGPT requires more tokens (24,613
or 31,255 compared to 19,292), it needs only 126.5/124.3 tokens to generate one line of code. In
contrast, ChatDev uses 248.9 tokens. These results highlight the benefits of SOPs in collabora-
tions between multiple agents. Additionally, we demonstrate the autonomous software generation
capabilities of MetaGPT through visualization samples (Figure 5). For additional experiments and
analysis, please refer to Appendix C.
Table 1: The statistical analysis on SoftwareDev.
Statistical Index ChatDev MetaGPT w/o Feedback MetaGPT
(A) Executability 2.25 3.67 3.75
(B) Cost#1: Running Times (s) 762 503 541
(B) Cost#2: Token Usage 19,292 24,613 31,255
(C) Code Statistic#1: Code Files 1.9 4.6 5.1
(C) Code Statistic#2: Lines of Code per File 40.8 42.3 49.3
(C) Code Statistic#3: Total Code Lines 77.5 194.6 251.4
(D) Productivity 248.9 126.5 124.3
(E) Human Revision Cost 2.5 2.25 0.83
4.3 C APABILITIES ANALYSIS
Compared to open-source baseline methods such as AutoGPT and autonomous agents such as
AgentVerse and ChatDev, MetaGPT offers functions for software engineering tasks. As presented
in Table 2, our framework encompasses a wide range of abilities to handle complex and specialized
development tasks efficiently. Incorporating SOPs (e.g., role-play expertise, structured communi-
cation, streamlined workflow) can significantly improve code generation. Other baseline methods
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Table 2: Comparison of capabilities for MetaGPT and other approaches. ‘!’ indicates the
presence of a specific feature in the corresponding framework, ‘%’ its absence.
Framework Capabiliy AutoGPT LangChain AgentVerse ChatDev MetaGPT
PRD generation % % % % !
Tenical design genenration % % % % !
API interface generation % % % % !
Code generation ! ! ! ! !
Precompilation execution % % % % !
Role-based task management % % % ! !
Code review % % ! ! !
Table 3: Ablation study on roles. ‘#’ denotes ‘The number of’, ‘Product’ denotes ‘Product man-
ager’, and ‘Project’ denotes ‘Project manager’. ‘ !’ indicates the addition of a specific role. ‘Revi-
sions’ refers to ‘Human Revision Cost’.
Engineer Product Architect Project #Agents #Lines Expense Revisions Executability
! % % % 1 83.0 $ 0.915 10 1.0
! ! % % 2 112.0 $ 1.059 6.5 2.0
! ! ! % 3 143.0 $ 1.204 4.0 2.5
! ! % ! 3 205.0 $ 1.251 3.5 2.0
! ! ! ! 4 191.0 $ 1.385 2.5 4.0
can easily integrate SOP-like designs to improve their performance, similar to injecting chain-of-
thought (Wei et al., 2022) in LLMs.
4.4 A BLATION STUDY
The Effectiveness of Roles To understand the impact of different roles on the final results, we
perform two tasks that involve generating effective code and calculating average statistics. When we
exclude certain roles, unworkable codes are generated. As indicated by Table 3, the addition of roles
different from just the Engineer consistently improves both revisions and executability. While more
roles slightly increase the expenses, the overall performance improves noticeably, demonstrating the
effectiveness of the various roles.
The Effectiveness of Executable Feedback Mechanism As shown in Figure 4, adding executable
feedback into MetaGPT leads to a significant improvement of 4.2% and 5.4% in Pass @1 on Hu-
manEval and MBPP, respectively. Besides, Table 1 shows that the feedback mechanism improves
feasibility (3.67 to 3.75) and reduces the cost of human revisions (2.25 to 0.83). These results
illustrate how our designed feedback mechanism can produce higher-quality code. Additional quan-
titative results of MetaGPT and MetaGPT without executable feedback are shown in Table 4 and
Table 9.
5 C ONCLUSION
This work introduces MetaGPT, a novel meta-programming framework that leverages SOPs to en-
hance the problem-solving capabilities of multi-agent systems based on Large Language Models
(LLMs). MetaGPT models a group of agents as a simulated software company, analogous to simu-
lated towns (Park et al., 2023) and the Minecraft Sandbox in V oyager (Wang et al., 2023a). MetaGPT
leverages role specialization, workflow management, and efficient sharing mechanisms such as mes-
sage pools and subscriptions, rendering it a flexible and portable platform for autonomous agents
and multi-agent frameworks. It uses an executable feedback mechanism to enhance code generation
quality during runtime. In extensive experiments, MetaGPT achieves state-of-the-art performance
on multiple benchmarks. The successful integration of human-like SOPs inspires future research
on human-inspired techniques for artificial multi-agent systems. We also view our work as an early
attempt to regulate LLM-based multi-agent frameworks. See also the outlook (Appendix A).
9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Acknowledgement
We thank Sarah Salhi, the Executive Secretary of KAUST AI Initiative, and Yuhui Wang, Postdoc-
toral Fellow at the KAUST AI Initiative, for helping to polish some of the text. We would like to
express our gratitude to Wenyi Wang, a PhD student at the KAUST AI Initiative, for providing com-
prehensive feedback on the paper and for helping to draft the outlook (Appendix A) with Mingchen.
We also thank Zongze Xu, the vice president of DeepWisdom, for providing illustrative materials
for AgentStore.
Author Contributions
Sirui Hong conducted most of the experiments and designed the executable feedback module. She
also led the initial version of the write-up, supported by Ceyao Zhang, and also by Jinlin Wang and
Zili Wang. Mingchen Zhuge designed the self-improvement module, discussed additional experi-
ments, and led the current write-up. Jiaqi Chen helped with the MBPP experiments, outlined the
methods section, and contributed to the current write-up. Xiawu Zheng provided valuable guidance,
reviewed and edited the paper. Yuheng Cheng contributed to the evaluation metric design and Hu-
manEval experiments. Steven Ka Shing Yau, Zijuan Lin, Liyang Zhou, Lingfeng Xiao helped with
the MBPP experiments and comparisons to open-source baseline methods. Chenyu Ran created
most of the illustrative figures. Chenglin Wu is the CEO of DeepWisdom, initiated MetaGPT, made
the most significant code contributions to it, and advised this project. J¨urgen Schmidhuber, Director
of the AI Initiative at KAUST and Scientific Director of IDSIA, advised this project and helped with
the write-up.
