record_id: arxiv:2411.00188
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2411.00188
fetched_title: Building Multi-Agent Copilot towards Autonomous Agricultural Data Management and Analysis
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:57Z

Building Multi-Agent Copilot towards Autonomous
Agricultural Data Management and Analysis
Yu Pan1, Jianxin Sun 2,4, Hongfeng Yu 2,4, Joe Luck 1, Geng Bai 5, Nipuna Chamara 1, Yufeng Ge 1, Tala Awada3
1Department of Biological System Engineering, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA
2School of Computing, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA
3School of Natural Resources, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA
4Holland Computing Center, University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, NE, USA
5Department of Biological and Agricultural Engineering, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC,USA
Abstract—The ubiquity of sensors and IoT devices has led to an
explosion in data availability in modern agriculture. The large
volume and heterogeneity of the data, together with the com-
plexity of data processing requirements, pose huge obstacles for
achieving the principles of Findable, Accessible, Interoperable,
and Reusable (FAIR). Current data management and analysis
paradigms are to large extent traditional, in which data collecting,
curating, integration, loading, storing, sharing and analyzing still
involve too much human effort and know-how. The experts,
researchers and the farm operators need to understand the data
and the whole process of data management pipeline to make fully
use of the data. The essential problem of the traditional paradigm
is the lack of a layer of orchestrational intelligence which
can understand, organize and coordinate the data processing
utilities to maximize data management and analysis outcome.
The emerging reasoning and tool mastering abilities of large
language models (LLM) make it a potentially good fit to this
position, which helps a shift from the traditional user-driven
paradigm to AI-driven paradigm. In this paper, we propose
and explore the idea of a LLM based copilot for autonomous
agricultural data management and analysis. Based on our pre-
viously developed platform of Agricultural Data Management
and Analytics (ADMA), we build a proof-of-concept multi-agent
system called ADMA Copilot, which can understand user’s intent,
makes plans for data processing pipeline and accomplishes tasks
automatically, in which three agents: a LLM based controller,
an input formatter and an output formatter collaborate together.
Different from existing LLM based solutions, by defining a meta-
program graph, our work decouples control flow and data flow
to enhance the predictability of the behaviour of the agents.
Experiments demonstrates the intelligence, autonomy, efficacy,
efficiency, extensibility, flexibility and privacy of our system.
Comparison is also made between ours and existing systems to
show the superiority and potential of our system.
Index Terms —Agricultural Data Management, Multi-Agent,
Copilot, FAIR principles, Large Language Model, Autonomous,
Paradigm shift
I. I NTRODUCTION
The core topics of modern agriculture is to meet the escalat-
ing needs for food, fuel, feed, and fiber in the era of climate
change, limited natural resources and intricate dynamics of
global ecosystems. To solve this challenge, data-informed
precision agriculture is not only required but also necessary,
in which the deployment of sensors, Internet of Things (IoT)
devices [1], and advanced instrumentation [2] has enabled data
collection in various modal, dimension, format, and resolu-
tion. While agricultural data has the potential to transform
agricultural practice by providing valuable insights into crop
productivity, soil quality, and sustainable farming techniques,
in the meanwhile, the large volume and heterogeneity, together
with the complexity of data processing requirements, pose
huge obstacles for for achieving the principles of Findable,
Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable (FAIR), which in turn
result in in-efficient utilization and exploration of the collected
data.
There are existing efforts trying to revolutionize current
practices of agriculture data management [3]–[7], by im-
plementing different data management platforms and tech-
nologies. Nevertheless, current practice of agricultural data
management and analysis is to large extent traditional in the
sense that the whole data management pipeline, including data
collecting, curating, integration, loading, storing, sharing and
analyzing still involve too much human effort and know-how.
The experts, researchers or the farm operators make every tiny
decisions from where to put a file, to which analysis tool to
use. In this process, they need to understand the details of the
data and tools at their hands, including location, semantics and
format of data, and the location, semantics and the interface of
the relevant data processing tools to make fully use of the data.
This human-driven paradigm incurs high cost of training and
makes reuse of the data and duplication of the data processing
pipeline difficult. The essential reason of the challenges faced
by the traditional practice of agricultural data management
lies in the fact that there’s a lack of a layer of orchestrational
intelligence which can understand, organize and coordinate
each phase of the data processing pipeline to maximize the
outcome.
In the meanwhile, Large Language Models (LLM) recently
start to demonstrate reasoning and tool mastering capabilities.
That is, augmented with a set of tools and given a task, LLM
need to make plans for the task, select appropriate tools for
each step, call the tools and observe the feedback from these
tools. Also there can be a observe-and-take-action loop until
the task can be accomplished. LLM’s reasoning capability
makes it feasible to make plans for a task or make decisions
about which tool will be used in next step. The application
arises naturally where we explore the possibility to fit LLM as
arXiv:2411.00188v1 [cs.AI] 31 Oct 2024

(a) User-Driven Paradigm
(b) AI-Driven Paradigm
Fig. 1: Shift of Agricultural Data Management Paradigm
the aforementioned orchestrational layer which can coordinate
and harness each component of agricultural data management
and coordinate each phase of the data processing pipeline.
Imagining the tools are not isolated with each other, but
form a network where each tool can connect with each other
through their inputs and outputs. The tool using intelligence
of LLM can probably find new paths in the complicated tool
networks and as a result gain new patterns and insight. This
will bring us a new data management paradigm in which
human effort can be reduced while the outcome of data
analysis can be probably maximized. In one word, LLM based
copilot will act as a controller in this new data management
paradigm, which helps human users to manage data, tools or
ML models. Furthermore, as new architectures of LLM-based
data management framework being proposed and as new tools,
IoT devices or sensors being continuously incorporated, the
systems adopting the new paradigm will hopefully grow into
a full-fledged autonomous data management system, which
can take care of mundane operations with minimal human
interference, and help human users to make decisions in data
management tasks. Fig 1 illustrates the shift of agricultural
data management.
In this paper, we propose and explore the idea of building a
LLM-based copilot for autonomous agricultural data manage-
ment system. We build a proof-of-concept multi-agent system,
called ADMA copilot, which can try its best to understand
user’s intent through interactions in both natural language and
GUI, and then make plan for data processing pipeline and
accomplish the task automatically. The exiting LLM-based
tool using systems generate function calls together with ar-
guments together, probably resulting in hallucinating problem
where LLM fabricates the value of arguments without solid
ground truth. Different from existing solutions, our system
decouple the data flow and control flow, by introducing a meta-
program graph which stores all the information about how to
use a tool and what a variable stores. In this way, we solve
the problem of hallucinating and increase the controllability
and predictability of the copilot. Under the hood, the copilot
has three agents collaborating together, one controller which
decides the tool called in next step, one input formatter which
modifies the value of variables based on user input, and one
output formatter which generates UI, based on user’s instruc-
tion. All the agents base their reasoning on the current status of
the meta-program graph, which helps them to make collected
decisions. We make comparison with existing agricultural data
management platforms by defining a set of criteria to show the
superiority and potential of our system in the long run.
We conduct extensive experiments to demonstrate the key
features of the our agricultural data management copilot listed
as follows:
• Intelligence: by introducing LLM based agents as program
controller, input formatter and output formatter, the copilot
demonstrates intelligence in terms of understanding human
intent, solution planning and tool/function calling.
• Autonomy: data management tasks which implicitly con-
tains several steps can be executed automatically with mini-
mal human interference. The design principle of our system
is not asking for user input or instruction unless necessary.
• Efficacy: multi-agent design decouples data flow from con-
trol flow, which will assure the predictability of the copilot
and eradicate the phenomena of hallucination of LLM.
• Efficiency: when executing complicated data management
tasks, the copilot is way more efficient than human being,
thanks to streamlining the whole pipeline.
• Extensibility: the tool set utilized by the copilot can be
extended, by augmenting the meta-program graph, which
will guarantee the copilot can have versatile application in
the future.
• Flexibility: the copilot can understand human input in a
flexible way. In some cases, even the user’s input is fuzzy
and has mistake, the copilot can still get the intent of the
user.
• Privacy: the copilot will protect user’s data by asking the
user to provide necessary credentials for various services.
Connected to our existing platform ADMA and various
external tools, the data management copilot can not only
help users to deal with tedious low-level data operations, but

also can be evolved to substitute human beings in decision
making, which both help to make the shift of agricultural data
management paradigm.
The key contributions of our work are summarized as
follows:
• We design and implement Agricultural Data Management
and Analytics Copilot (ADMA Copilot), which is a multi-
agent copilot for autonomous agricultural data management
and analysis. To our knowledge, it is the first of its kind,
not only in agricultural data management, but in scientific
data management as a whole.
• As a proof-of-concept product, ADMA Copilot can help to
facilitate the shift of agricultural data management paradigm
from traditionally human-driven paradigm to AI-driven
paradigm.
• Extensive demos and evaluations demonstrate the intelli-
gence, autonomy, efficacy, efficiency, extensibility, flexibil-
ity and privacy of our system. Comparison is also made
between ours and existing systems to show the superiority
and potential of our system.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section
II surveys existing work relevant to our research. Section
III presents the design principles and frameworks of our
copilot. In Section IV, we provide the thorough demos and
evaluations of the current status of ADMA. Finally, in Section
V, we conclude the paper by discussing the contributions and
suggesting future directions.
II. R ELATED WORK
A. Tool Learning with Large Language Models
Tool learning with Large Language Models (LLMs) has
emerged recently as a promising paradigm for augmenting
the capabilities of LLMs to accomplish complicated tasks,
by utilizing LLMs reasoning abilities. Here the tool can be
a program, a database, an API endpoint for a cloud based
service, a sensor, hardware devices or anything of which the
interface can be coded as plan text and thus can be recognized
and utilized by LLMs.
A large corpus of exiting work has been proposed to explore
different aspects and phases of Tool learning with LLMs
[8]–[10]. Tool learning with LLMs is in fact an umbrella
concept which encompasses a lot of subcategories, including
augmenting LLMs with external knowledge [11]–[14], aug-
menting LLMs with mathematical reasoning ability [15], [16],
augmenting LLMs with program executors [17], [18], and
augmenting LLMs with domain specific tool sets [19], [20].
Generally speaking, there are four phases in tool learning with
LLMs: task planning, tool selection, tool calling and response
generation [8]. In task planning, a task is decomposed into
several sub-tasks, by utilizing LLM’s reasoning capabilities
[21]–[26]. In tool selection, the most appropriate tool is
selected by LLM for each phase generated from task planning
[27], [28]. In tool calling phase, the selected tool is called,
based on given interface of the tool. Again LLM will be used
to format the calling interface, that is, configure the order and
value of arguments for a method call [29]–[31]. Nowadays,
large language models such as GPT-4 can output function
calling, given the description of the tool and the user input
[32]. Lastly, the output of the tools can be combined and
formatted for output, by utilizing LLM’s language organization
capability [33]. Each phase can utilize LLM and thus there will
be several agents collaborating together for the whole process.
The existing works explore different frameworks to imple-
ment tool learning with LLMs, however, almost all the works
don’t decouple data flow from control flow, which may result
in hallucination problem and in turn fail a task. In our work,
we generate a meta-program graph, as a representation of the
tools and their affiliated data and use three agents: controller,
input formatter and output formatter to deal with control flow
and data flow respectively. In this way, we can increase the
predictability of the result generated by the LLM-based agents
and thus increase the success rate of the task solving process.
B. Agricultural Data Management Systems
The digital revolution in agriculture has paved the way for
advanced data management platforms specifically designed
to tackle the unique challenges and demands of agricul-
tural research and production. Several notable platforms have
emerged in related sectors.
CyVerse [34], initially developed for plant genomics, has ex-
panded into a comprehensive platform, offering life scientists
robust computational infrastructure to manage large datasets
and conduct complex analyses. As a cloud-based solution, Cy-
Verse supports collaborative efforts, enabling seamless sharing
of data and tools. Its focus on scalability and interoperability
has made it a crucial tool for modern agricultural data man-
agement. GARDIAN [5], the CGIAR’s (Consultative Group
for International Agricultural Research) data discovery plat-
form, allows users to find research datasets and publications
from various CGIAR Centers and Programs. By aggregating
data from multiple agricultural research projects, GARDIAN
offers a holistic view of global agricultural research, fos-
tering interdisciplinary collaboration. GEMS [4] integrates
genomic, phenotypic, and environmental data, offering tools
for analyzing and visualizing large-scale agricultural datasets,
thereby linking genomics with environmental factors in agri-
cultural research. TERRAREF [6] focuses on delivering high-
resolution sensor data for plant research, using tools such as
cameras and drones to gather detailed information on plant
growth, health, and environmental conditions. This extensive
dataset aids researchers in exploring the intricate relationships
between plants and their environments. The evolution of Smart
Farming into Agriculture 5.0 [35] emphasizes the critical
role of data in optimizing farm management for sustainabil-
ity and economic efficiency. Lastly, ADMA [7] introduces
an innovative agricultural data management system designed
according to FAIR principles, incorporating features such as
intelligence, interactivity, scalability, flexibility, open-source
pipeline management, and enhanced privacy and security.
Several platforms and studies emphasize the importance of
integrated data management systems for addressing specific

agricultural topics or utilizing advanced technologies. For
instance, Agricultural Remote Sensing Big Data [36] explores
the management and application of remote sensing big data
in agriculture, introducing a four-layer-twelve-level (FLTL)
framework designed to handle remote sensing data for pre-
cision farming and local farm analyses. Data Warehouse and
Decision Support on Integrated Crop Big Data [37] presents a
thorough analysis of data warehousing and decision support
systems, demonstrating their capability in leveraging inte-
grated crop big data through the development of a continental-
level Agricultural Data Warehouse (ADW). Big Data and
Machine Learning (ML) With Hyperspectral Information in
Agriculture [38] reviews critical research utilizing big data,
machine learning, and deep learning, with a specific focus on
processing hyperspectral and multispectral agricultural data.
It highlights the potential of ensemble machine learning and
scalable parallel discriminant analysis in managing agricultural
big data. Lastly, Blockchain for Sustainable e-Agriculture [39]
discusses the intersection of blockchain technology and IoT
in e-agriculture, emphasizing how blockchain can enhance
agricultural value chains, strengthen IoT networks, and ensure
data validation, security, and privacy.
III. F RAMEWORK
To support the FAIR principles and the proposed key
features such as intelligence, autonomy, efficacy, efficiency,
extensibility, flexibility and privacy, we design and implement
a proof-of-concept system called Agricultural Data Manage-
ment and Analytics Copilot (ADMA Copilot).
A. Shift of Paradigm
Thanks to the emerging reasoning and tool learning ability
of large language models, there will be a shift of agricultural
data management paradigm. In the traditional paradigm, re-
searchers need to understand every details of the data and tools
(or ML models) at their hands, such as location, semantics and
format of data, and the location, semantics and the interface of
the tools (or ML models). When conducting data management,
researchers need to manipulate the data, tools or ML models in
person. So we can call the traditional paradigm as user-driven
paradigm. On the other hand, in the new data management
paradigm, an LLM-based copilot will take over to manipulate
the data management pipeline, and the researchers will only
send high-level requests to the copilot to initiate the pipeline
and get involved when required. We can call the new paradigm
as AI-driven paradigm. Fig 1 illustrate the shift of agricultural
data management shift.
B. System Components
There are two types of components in our framework: inter-
nal components and external components. Internal components
are the integral parts of the ADMA Copilot, including a copilot
server, three LLM-based Agents, a meta-program graph, a
data&tool registry. The ADMA Copilot talks with external
components such as the original ADMA system, sensors,
external cloud storage and computing services, external tools
& APIs, and finally, a web front-end. Figure 2 illustrates the
the main components ADMA Copilot and their interactions.
In The following subsections, we’ll introduce each main
components.
Fig. 2: Main Components of ADMA Copilot
1) Copilot Server: The copilot sever is the hub of the
whole system, which is responsible for coordinating other
components. The copilot server receives instructions from the
web front-end and output the results to the front-end. When
receiving a task, the copilot server will search in its data &
tool registry for relevant tools to use and build a meta-program
graph. The copilot server also talks to three LLM-based agents
and meta-program graph, to decide the tools to call in each
step and to format the input/output of the meta-program. When
the tool to call is determined, the copilot server will reach out
to the specified tool, execute the call, and retrieve the results
from the tool.
The design principle of the copilot server is to decouple the
programmatic part from the ”intelligent” part, by only keeping
the programmatic part within its own logic and off-loading the
intelligent part to the three LLM-based agents. In this way, the
logic of copilot server can be kept at its minimal.
2) LLM-based Agents: There are three LLM-based agents:
a program controller, an input formatter and an output for-
mmater, all of which will accept current task, meta-program
graph and the execution history as input. The program con-
troller is responsible for determining the control flow of the
program, namely, which tool to execute in next step, by
looking into the status of current meta-program graph and
taking into account of the task to accomplish. The program
controller has the highest requirements for the reasoning
capability of the underlying LLM, because it needs to analyze
current task and conduct the planning accordingly, and for
some complicated tasks, the planning always requires high
reasoning capability.The other two LLM-based agents, input

formatter and output formmater, control the data flow, by
translating the input to the value of the variable or translating
the value to output, respectively.
Three agents are coordinated by the copilot server and are
triggered when required to keep the control flow and data flow
of the program on track, thus finally solve the task proposed
by the end user.
3) Meta-Program Graph: Meta-program graph is a in-
dispensable component which encodes the meta-structure of
the tools and data. Through meta-program, the for-mentioned
LLM-based agents can understand what a tool or data is about
and make collected decisions on controlling the control flow
and data flow in completing the task. It is the meta-program
that makes data flow decoupled from the control flow and as
a result, increase the predictability of the result.
Fig. 3: An Example of Meta-Program Graph
Figure 3 illustrates an example of meta-program graph, in
which the boxes in color represent various types of tools and
the boxes in gray represent the variables, the arrows between
each pair of boxes indicates the direction of data flow. Each
task will begin from the user input (red box). After translated
by input formmater, the values contained in the instruction
will start to flow on the meta-program graph. In each step,
the controller will be called to decide the routing on meta-
program graph. If an output condition is triggered and the
output formatter will be called to format a result, in natural
language, or in UI. For instance, if the user asks for some
knowledge, the output will normally be in natural language,
if the user asks for a data visualization, then a plot will be
displayed, or if the user asks for data downloading, a download
button will pop up.
We design the meta-program in a concise format, which
contains all the necessary information about the data and tools,
while keeping it small enough to fit in the context window of
a typical LLM. Also the meta-program graph is extensible to
contain hundreds or thousands of tools, which will help to
solve complicated tasks containing tens or hundreds of steps
of actions.
4) Data & Tool Registry: The meta data about tools and
data can be store in data & tool registry for the copilot to
reference. When the number of tools grows really large, it
is not possible to store the information about all the tools
and affiliate variables in meta-program graph, so in this
case, copilot will first retrieve relevant tools to construct the
meta-program graph, and also retrieve the data to initialize
relevant variables. Also the registry can store user and session
information, which makes it act as a long-term memory of the
copilot.
5) ADMA: ADMA is short for Agricultural Data Man-
agement and Analytics, which is the system we developed
before [7]. Here we incorporate ADMA into the framework by
connecting the copilot with ADMA. Through ADMA’s API,
the copilot can manipulate the data and the tools hosted on
ADMA, just as a human user. In the copilot’s perspective,
ADMA can be considered as a set of external tools, which
can be integrated into the data management pipeline. We’ll
demonstrate some use case of the copilot involving ADMA in
the following section.
6) Sensors & IoT Devices: ADMA Copilot can be con-
nected to various sensors and IoT devices on the field, through
APIs or specifically designed interface. The copilot will treat
the sensors the same way as other tools, to collect on-field
information such as air temperature, humidity, precipitation,
wind speed, soil moisture, nitrogen, carbon dioxide, fertilizer
application and etc, which is extremely important for certain
tasks involving decision making. Here in our proof-of-concept
system, we connect the copilot with John Deere [40] API and
Realm5 [41] API, to collect field operation information and
weather data respectively. We’ll demonstrate some use case of
the copilot calling sensors through these APIs in the following
section.
7) External Cloud Services: ADMA copilot can make full
use of existing cloud storage and computing service, such
as One Drive, Google Drive, Google Cloud, Amazon AWS
or Dropbox. These cloud services provide more options for
the user to store their data, run their program or host the
ML/AI models. Copilot will register the interface for these
cloud services and help the user to manage their data, tools
or models on these service. For our proof-or-concept copilot,
we connect it with Google Drive. Autonomous data movement
between Google Drive and ADMA is demonstrated in the next
section.
8) External Tools: Copilot can be connected to various
other external tools, through APIs or specifically designed
interface. When new tools get connected, they will be reg-
istered in the data & tool registry and later when needed,
copilot can discover and call them. These feature assures the
extensibility of our system and make it applicable to any
application scenario.
9) Web Front-end: A conversation based web front-end is
provided to the end user, who can type in any data manage-
ment instruction to the copilot. Once the copilot completes the
instruction (or fails it), the final response will be displayed
back to the end user on the web front. The specific format
of the response will depend on the instruction. It can be in
natural language, a table, a plot, a UI gadget, a web page or
a image. The following section will contain several use cases
about the results showing on the web front-end.

IV. E VALUATION
In this section, we demonstrate the use cases of ADMA
Copilot to prove its core features such as intelligence, auton-
omy, efficacy, efficiency, extensibility, flexibility and privacy.
A. Interface
ADMA Copilot has a conversational interface, where the
user can type in the instruction into the chat box at the bottom
of the web page. Then the results will be displayed above
the chat box. All the chat history within a session will be
preserved. In Figure 4, when the user asks ”go to ADMA”,
then the main page of ADMA will be displayed. ADMA
Copilot will also display the steps it has gone through.
Fig. 4: A Demo for Conversational UI of ADMA Copilot
B. Intelligence
ADMA Copilot can understand user intent in natural lan-
guage. Sometimes, even the user input a fuzzy or somewhat
ambigous instruction, the copilot will try its best to interpret
the user’s intent. Figure 5 illustrate a case in which the user
type in the instruction: ”I want to know how to use ADMA.”
Then the copilot will display the documentation page of the
ADMA because this is the result which is most appropriate in
this context.
Fig. 5: A Demo for User Intent Understanding
C. Autonomy
One of the key features of ADMA copilot is autonomy. It
is designed to try its best to accomplish the tasks proposed by
users autonomously, except extra user input is required. For
(a) Transfer File from Google Drive to ADMA and Open the Page
(b) Transfer File from Google Drive to ADMA and then Download
(c) Open the file for Realm5 Data on 2024/5/1
(d) Download the file for Realm5 Data on 2024/5/1
Fig. 6: Demo for Autonomous Task Completion
each task, the program controller of the copilot will route on
the meta-program graph and complete several steps until the
task is finally accomplished.
Figure 6 demonstrates some use cases of autonomous task

(a) Ask for User Input when Unsure
(b) Display the Result after Further Input
Fig. 7: Demo for Efficacy
completion. In Figure 6a, the user type in ”Transfer the
adma test/test.txt on my google drive to my ADMA root
folder, and open the uploaded file”. The copilot decomposes
the task into several steps, such as call the input formatter,
authenticate the user for Google drive, download the file from
Google Drive, upload the file to ADMA, then open the page
of the uploaded file. In Figure 6b, the user type in ”Transfer
the adma test/test.txt on my google drive to my ADMA root
folder, and then download the uploaded file”, similarly the
copilot accomplish the task by first downloading the file from
Google drive and then uploading it to ADMA, followed by
poping up a download button for the user to click. In Figure
6c, the user types in ”go to the file for Realm5 data on
2024/5/1”, again the copilot decompose the task into several
steps: initializing the date and menu name, generating the
path for the file on ADMA, generating the url for the file on
ADMA, displaying the web page for the file. In Figure 6d, the
user asks ”download the file for Realm5 data on 2024/5/1”, the
copilot first generates the url for the file on ADMA as previous
task, and then call download API of ADMA to download the
file, followed by popping up a download button.
Through these use cases, we can see ADMA Copilot has
the basic capability to understand user’s intent and complete
tasks automatically, with minimal user interference.
D. Efficacy
The design of our copilot reduces the phenomena of hallu-
cination of LLM to its minimal, by decoupling data flow from
control flow. That is, when generating the calling interface of
any tool, instead of asking LLM-based controller to do so,
we use the value of the variable within meta-program graph.
If there are not enough information, the copilot will ask for
further input from the user, rather than fabricate some plausible
value. This will make sure the predictability of the final results.
Figure 7 illustrates a case when the user inputs ”plot
temperature, humidity and wind speed” in 7a, since the copilot
is not sure the time span of the data to draw, it will ask for
further input: ”Please input a data string for Realm5.”. After
the user provide the date ”2024/5/1”, the copilot will retrieve
the relevant data and plot it to the user as in 7b.
E. Efficiency
Autonomy not only brings about convenience, but also
efficiency. For some complicated tasks which contain several
steps, the copilot demonstrates its efficiency compared with
human users. Here we conduct a comparison between ADMA
copilot and human user, in terms of task completion time for
several data management tasks.
Fig. 8: Comparison of Task Completion Time between Copilot
and Human Users.
In Figure 8, we choose 5 tasks as follows:
A. ”Go to directory 1 under root folder of ADMA”,
B. ”Check the meta data of calculate ndvi.py on ADMA”,
C. ”Open the page on ADAM, the name of which contains
the keyword soil”,
D. ”Download the file for Realm5 data on 2024/5/1”,
E. ”Transfer the adma test/test.txt on my google drive to my
ADMA root folder, and open the uploaded file”
The bars represent the average task completion time for
copilot and human user, for each task. The green curve
represents the number of steps the copilot has gone through
for each task, which provides some clue about the complex
level for a task. We can see for more complicated tasks, both
the copilot and human user take longer time, however, the
copilot outperforms human user in all tasks, and also the
copilot keeps the completion time almost constant, regardless
of the increasing complex level of tasks.
F . Extensibility
To accommodate more tools, ADMA Copilot is designed to
be able to incorporate new tools which will be incorporated in
the future. Given a documentation of any new API or function
interface, the only thing we need to do is to plug in the tool
into the meta-program graph and inform the copilot how to
use the new tools. Then all things left will be handled to the

copilot without any changes as before. The copilot will make
calls to the new tools when required. For instance, when we
design a new user interface which can draw a map for the fields
on our extension farm, we can just plug in the description of
the UI tool into meta-program graph, and then when the user
inputs ”I want to see the map for the field named 1863N”, the
output will be like in Figure 9
Fig. 9: Demo of Drawing a Map for a Field after Plugging in
the Map UI
G. Flexibility
Thanks to the reasoning capability of the underlying LLM,
our copilot demonstrates some degree of flexibility in terms of
understanding the user’s intent based on a wide spectrum of
user input. The user can be free from precisely phrasing the
instruction, and the user input can be fuzzy or even ambiguous.
Nevertheless, the copilot will try its best to interpret the user’s
instruction and execute the task accordingly.
In Figure 10a, the user inputs ”download the file
adma test/test.txt on Google drive”, then the copilot will
download the specified file and display a download button on
the interface. In Figure 10b, the user typs in ”I need to check
the file adma test/test.txt on Google drive”, the copilot can get
the same intent as previous input and still display a download
button on the interface.
H. Privacy and Authentication
ADMA Copilot will protect the user’s data and privacy, by
ask for user’s credentials to authenticate when the user need to
get access to protected services or data. In Figure 11a, the user
want to ”list my Google drive root folder”, then the copilot
decides it is a protected resource and ask for the user to go
through the authentication process for Google drive. In Figure
11b, the user types in ”download the Realm5 data on 2024/5/1
on ADMA”, then the copilot decides this is also a protected
data and asks the user to input ADMA token.
I. Comparison
By adopting similar evaluation frameworks as in [7], we
compare ADMA Copilot with the existing agriculture plat-
forms. The evaluation criteria and corresponding explanation
are listed in Table I. These criteria cover a broad range
of dimensions, from the basic requirements for a typical
(a) Download A File from Google Drive
(b) Check A File from Google Drive
Fig. 10: Demo of Flexible User Instruction
(a) Ask for Google Credentials
(b) Ask for ADMA Token
Fig. 11: Demo of Privacy Protection
data management platform to more innovative features, which
also take into consideration the principles of FAIR. The
eleven dimensions of criteria are, namely, privacy and security,
CRUD repository, interoperability, extensibility, data model,
data granularity, analytical tools, tractability, ML Models, and
Intelligence and Autonomy.
We make qualitative comparison between ADMA Copilot
with existing agricultural data management platforms includ-
ing CyVerse, GARDIAN, GEMS, TERRAREF and ADMA.
Table II shows the comparison result. We mark × when a
platform satisfies certain criteria and leave the cell empty
otherwise.
ADMA Copilot meets all the criteria under consideration.
While this comparison is qualitative and may introduce bias
due to the selection and specific definition of evaluation

criteria, the results suggest that our platform excels in the
chosen dimensions. This indicates that the design principles
of our system address a broader range of potential user needs
and interests, positioning it well for future requirements.
V. C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose and explore the idea of a LLM
based multi-agent copilot for autonomous agricultural data
management. Based on our previous developed platform: Agri-
cultural Data Management and Analytics, we build a system
called ADMA Copilot, which can understand user’s intent,
makes plan for data processing pipeline and accomplishes
the task automatically, in which three agents: a LLM based
controller, an input formatter and an output formatter col-
laborate together. Different from existing LLM based solu-
tions, by defining a meta-program graph, our work decouples
control flow and data flow to enhance the predictability of
the behaviour of the agents. As a proof-of-concept product,
ADMA Copilot can help to facilitate the shift of agricultural
data management paradigm from traditionally human-driven
paradigm to AI-driven paradigm. Experiments demonstrates
the intelligence, autonomy, efficacy, efficiency, extensibility,
flexibility and privacy of our system. Comparison is also made
between ours and existing systems to show the superiority and
potential of our system.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is funded by the Nebraska Research Initiative.
This work was completed utilizing the Holland Computing
Center of the University of Nebraska, which receives support
from the UNL Office of Research and Economic Development
and the Nebraska Research Initiative.
