record_id: arxiv:2410.08164
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2410.08164
fetched_title: AGENT S: A N OPEN AGENTIC FRAMEWORK THAT USES COMPUTERS LIKE A HUMAN
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T18:59:44Z

Preprint
AGENT S: A N OPEN AGENTIC FRAMEWORK THAT
USES COMPUTERS LIKE A HUMAN
Saaket Agashe∗, Jiuzhou Han∗, Shuyu Gan, Jiachen Yang, Ang Li, Xin Eric Wang
Simular Research
Human
Can you help me calculate the total
sales, average monthly sales, and
generate visualizations?
Online Web Search
* Select the cells containing
all the required data …
* Click theInsert Charticon
on the Standard toolbar …
Agent-Computer Interface
agent.type(“=SUM(Sheet1.A2:A20)”)
The total sales have been calculated …
agent.drag_and_drop(ele_id1, ele_id2)
The cells have been selected …
Planning
Subtask
Execution
Subtask 1:Calculate the total sales
Subtask 2: Calculate the average sales
Subtask 3:Create a chart to visualize
...
Hierarchical Planning
Abstractive Task Experience
Retrieval
External Knowledge
Subtask Experience
Retrieval
Narrative Memory
I did similar tasks in doing
calculationinLibreOfficeCalc.
Use the formula SUM to …
Episodic Memory
To sum … and select the cell…,
-agent.type()
-agent.drag_and_drop() …
Figure 1: Agent S uses a computer like a human to solve diverse desktop tasks on different systems.
ABSTRACT
We present Agent S, an open agentic framework that enables autonomous in-
teraction with computers through a Graphical User Interface (GUI), aimed at
transforming human-computer interaction by automating complex, multi-step
tasks. Agent S aims to address three key challenges in automating computer
tasks: acquiring domain-specific knowledge, planning over long task horizons,
and handling dynamic, non-uniform interfaces. To this end, Agent S introduces
experience-augmented hierarchical planning, which learns from external knowl-
edge search and internal experience retrieval at multiple levels, facilitating ef-
ficient task planning and subtask execution. In addition, it employs an Agent-
Computer Interface (ACI) to better elicit the reasoning and control capabilities
of GUI agents based on Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs). Eval-
uation on the OSWorld benchmark shows that Agent S outperforms the base-
line by 9.37% on success rate (an 83.6% relative improvement) and achieves a
new state-of-the-art. Comprehensive analysis highlights the effectiveness of in-
dividual components and provides insights for future improvements. Further-
more, Agent S demonstrates broad generalizability to different operating sys-
tems on a newly-released WindowsAgentArena benchmark. Code available at
https://github.com/simular-ai/Agent-S.
1 I NTRODUCTION
“The digital revolution is far more significant than the invention of writing or even of printing. ”
— Douglas Engelbart, The Inventor of Computer Mouse
Since its invention, the mouse has been controlled by humans for interacting with computers. But
does it really have to be? Autonomous Graphical User Interface (GUI) agents offer the promise of
∗Equal contributions.
1
arXiv:2410.08164v1 [cs.AI] 10 Oct 2024

Preprint
solving very specific and highly varied user queries—such as data entry, scheduling, and document
creation for individual users, and streamlining operations in commercial settings—in the most gen-
eral way: through direct UI interaction using the mouse and keyboard. Moreover, by eliminating
the need for constant manual interaction, these agents not only boost efficiency but also improve
accessibility, empowering individuals with disabilities to interact with technology in new, trans-
formative ways. Recent advancements in Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs), such as
GPT-4o (OpenAI, 2023) and Claude (Anthropic, 2024), have laid the foundation for the develop-
ment of GUI agents for human-centred interactive systems like desktop OS (Xie et al., 2024; Bonatti
et al., 2024).
However, automating computer tasks presents significant challenges. First, the vast range of
constantly-evolving applications and websites requires the agent to possess specialized and up-to-
date domain knowledge and the ability to learn from open-world experience. Second, complex
desktop tasks often involve long-horizon, multi-step planning with interdependent actions that must
be executed in a specific sequence. The agent must, therefore, create a clear plan with interme-
diate subgoals and track task progress. Third, GUI agents must navigate dynamic, non-uniform
interfaces, processing large volumes of visual and textual information while operating within a vast
action space. This involves distinguishing between relevant and irrelevant elements, accurately in-
terpreting graphical cues, and responding to visual feedback during task execution.
In this paper, we present Agent S, a new agentic framework that tackles these challenges towards
the goal of using computers like a human. First, to enhance the GUI agent’s capabilities in solving
diverse, long-horizon desktop tasks with specific domain knowledge, we propose an Experience-
Augmented Hierarchical Planning method. This approach leverages Online Web Knowledge and
past experiences stored in Narrative Memory to decompose the complex, long-horizon task into a
structured plan of manageable subtasks (see Figure 1). Online Web Knowledge provides up-to-date
external knowledge about specific applications, allowing the agent to adapt to frequently chang-
ing software and websites. Narrative Memory contains high-level, abstractive task experiences from
past interactions, equipping the agent with contextual understanding for effective task planning. The
agent monitors task completion progress, and during each subtask execution, it retrieves detailed,
step-by-step subtask experience from Episodic Memory to dynamically refine its actions and contin-
uously improve its planning ability. Successful subtasks and the full task experience are evaluated,
summarized, and stored in episodic and narrative memory to enable continual improvement.
41.7%
6.2%
12.3%
14.3%
7.5%
45.8%
13.0%
27.1%
36.7%
10.5%
0%
10%
20%
30%
40%
50%
Operating
System
Office Daily Professional Workflow
OSWorld Agent S
Figure 2: Agent S vs. OSWorld Agent results
across five broad computer task categories.
Furthermore, we introduce a specific language-
centric Agent-Computer Interface (ACI)
(Lieberman & Selker, 2003) as an abstraction
layer to improve grounding, safety, and ef-
ficiency for MLLM-based GUI agents. The
ACI defines an interaction paradigm by (1)
a dual-input strategy using visual input for
understanding environmental changes together
with an image-augmented accessibility tree for
precise element grounding; (2) a bounded ac-
tion space of language-based primitives (e.g.,
click(element id)) that are conducive to
MLLM common-sense reasoning and generate
environment transitions at the right temporal
resolution for the agent to observe immediate
and task-relevant environment feedback.
Our approach shows a remarkable improvement in the overall performance of Agent S on the
OSWorld benchmark (OpenAI, 2023) (from 11.21% to 20.58%, with a relative improvement of
83.6%), establishing the new state-of-the-art results. The detailed comparison is shown in Fig-
ure 2, which demonstrates consistent improvements by Agent S across five broad computer task
categories over the OSWorld agent. We also evaluate our Agent S on a concurrent work—
WindowsAgentArena (Bonatti et al., 2024), where we observe a performance improvement from
13.3% to 18.2% on an equivalent setup without any explicit adaptation. The improvement
demonstrates the broad generalizability of Agent S to different operating systems. We detail the
component-wise improvements introduced by the proposed strategies through ablation studies and
2

Preprint
present a comprehensive error analysis of our Agent S framework. In summary, our contributions
are four-fold:
• We introduce Agent S, a new agentic framework that integrates experience-augmented hierar-
chical planning, self-supervised continual memory update, and an Agent-Computer Interface for
MLLM-based GUI agents to perform complex computer tasks.
• We propose an experience-augmented hierarchical planning method that uses experience from
external web knowledge and the agent’s internal memory to decompose complex tasks into exe-
cutable subtasks.
• We extend the concept of an ACI to GUI agents, allowing MLLM-based agents to operate com-
puters more precisely using a set of high-level, predefined primitive actions.
• We conduct extensive experiments on OSWorld to show the effectiveness of individual compo-
nents of Agent S, establishing new state-of-the-art on automating computer tasks. Besides, we
demonstrate its generalizability across different operating systems on WindowsAgentArena.
2 R ELATED WORK
MLLM Agents. The advent of Multimodal Large Language Models (MLLMs) has led to a host of
works that utilize them as a reasoning backbone in Agentic Systems (Sumers et al., 2024). These
Agents augment LLMs with Memory, Structured Planning (Wang et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023;
Weng et al., 2023), Tool Use (Schick et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2023; Patil et al., 2023) and the ability
to Act in external environments Park et al. (2023). These agents have shown promise in domains
ranging from embodied simulators (Liang et al., 2023; Song et al., 2023) to video games (Wu et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2024) and scientific research (Bran et al., 2023). For Software Engineering (Hong
et al., 2024; Qian et al., 2024) in particular, Yang et al. (2024) proposed an Agent-Computer Interface
(Lieberman & Selker, 2003) for MLLM agents to understand and act more efficiently and reliably.
Our work extends and integrates these individual modules into a new MLLM agent framework for
computer control.
GUI Agents. MLLM agents have been applied to execute natural language instructions in both web
and OS environments. Early research concentrated on web navigation tasks, utilizing MLLMs to in-
teract with web interfaces (Gur et al., 2024; He et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2023; Shaw et al., 2023; Putta
et al., 2024). Recently, the focus has shifted to OS-level environments, leading to the development of
benchmarks and frameworks such as OSWorld Xie et al. (2024) and WindowsAgentArena Bonatti
et al. (2024) for desktop control, and DiGIRL (Bai et al., 2024) and AndroidWorld (Rawles et al.,
2024) for mobile environments. These OS-level tasks offer broader control capabilities beyond
the limitations of single-browser contexts in web navigation. Methodologically, earlier GUI agents
employed behavioral cloning with reinforcement learning (Humphreys et al., 2022), in-context tra-
jectory examples (Zheng et al., 2024b), state-dependent offline experience (Fu et al., 2024b), and
reusable skill generation (Wang et al., 2024). Contemporaneous work on GUI agents for video
games and OS (Wu et al., 2024; Song et al., 2024; Tan et al., 2024) propose varying instances
of cognitive architectures (Sumers et al., 2024). Our work contributes unique modules such as
experience-augmented hierarchical planning and ACI for GUI control, integrated with a novel con-
tinual memory update framework.
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (RAG) for AI Agents. RAG (Fan et al., 2024) improves the
reliability of MLLM inference by augmenting the input with reliable and up-to-date external knowl-
edge. Similarly, MLLM agents benefit from retrieving task exemplars (Kim et al., 2024), state-aware
guidelines (Fu et al., 2024a), and past experiences (Kagaya et al., 2024). Our use of experience for
augmentation differs in three ways: 1) our hierarchical planning leverages both full task experience
and subtask experience; 2) the full task experience is summarized into an abstractive textual reward
for subtask planning; 3) the subtask experience is assessed and annotated by a self-evaluator before
being stored in memory.
3 A GENT S
Agent S, illustrated in Figure 3, is a novel framework that integrates three main strategies in a
closed loop to tackle complex GUI-based operating system control tasks: experience-augmented
3

Preprint
Manager
Narrative
Memory
Experience
Context Fusion
Subtask Planner
𝑆0
𝑆𝑛
Worker
Trajectory
Reflector
Episodic
Memory
Action Generator
𝑆1
𝑤0
𝑤1
𝑆𝑛 𝑤𝑛
Agent Computer
Interface
Bounded
Action Space
ID-Grounding
OCR
Augmentation
𝑎𝑡
𝑜0
𝑜𝑡
𝐸𝑛
Evaluator𝐸𝑒
Desktop
Environment
𝑇𝑢
Workers 𝑤0. . 𝑤𝑛
Subtasks 𝑆0. . 𝑆𝑛
Observation
Action
User Task
Episodic
Experience
Narrative
Experience
Web
Knowledge
Figure 3: Overview of the Agent S framework. Given task Tu and initial environment observation
o0, the Manager conducts experience-augmented hierarchical planning using web knowledge and
narrative memory to produce subtasks s0, . . . , sn. For each si, Worker wi draws from episodic
memory to generate an actionat at time t, which is executed by the ACI to return the next immediate
observation ot+1. A self-evaluation module closes the loop by storing the summarized subtask and
full-task trajectories in narrative and episodic memory.
hierarchical planning, continual update of narrative and episodic memory, and an Agent-Computer
Interface for precise perception and action on GUIs. Experience-augmented hierarchical planning
allows Agent S to break down complex tasks into manageable subtasks. This enables both high-level
planning and low-level execution to draw from external web-based experience and internal task-
specific experience. A continual process of storing and retrieving self-evaluated task experience in
narrative and episodic memory enables Agent S to improve over time and adapt to changes in the
open-world desktop environment. The ACI ensures grounding by providing a vision-augmented
accessibility tree observation containing all valid GUI elements and constraining the agent’s chosen
action to a bounded discrete space of valid actions. Below, we describe each component and its
integration in detail.
3.1 E XPERIENCE -AUGMENTED HIERARCHICAL PLANNING
3.1.1 M ANAGER : F USING EXTERNAL KNOWLEDGE AND INTERNAL EXPERIENCE FOR
PLANNING
The Manager G is the primary plan generator module in our system. It receives a task Tu from
the user and the initial environment observation O0 (Annotated Accessibility Tree + Screenshot)
from the ACI as input. The manager formulates an observation-aware query Q based on the user
instruction and its observation in a “How to do X” format. This query is used for two types of
retrieval. First, the query is used for Online Web Search through Perplexica Search Engine 1 to
get external knowledge. Then the same query is used to retrieve a similar task experience summary
from the Manager’s own Narrative Memory Mn. The retrieval is based on the similarity of the
query embedding.
The Narrative Memory includes summaries of both successful and failed trajectories with specific
actions removed as abstractive full task experience Enu. The success/failure is evaluated by the
Self-Evaluator S module (described in Subsection 3.1.3) without any human feedback or ground
truth information. This two-step retrieval provides the Manager with both the general and specific
1https://github.com/ItzCrazyKns/Perplexica
4

Preprint
domain knowledge required to plan for the task. The outputs of the retrieval process are fused into a
single fused guideline using the Experience Context Fusion submodule, represented formally as:
Q = LLM(Tu, O0)
Kweb = Retrieve(Web, Q)
Enu = Retrieve(Mn, Q)
Kfused = LLM(Mn(Q), Kweb)
The fused knowledge Kfused is then used by Subtask Planner submodule of the Manager to for-
mulate a detailed, topologically sorted queue of subtasks ⟨s0...sn⟩ that can accomplish the user
instruction. The manager also generates associated context Csi for each subtask si which includes
additional information useful to accomplish the subtask.
3.1.2 W ORKER : L EARNING FROM SUBTASK EXPERIENCE AND TRAJECTORY REFLECTION
The subtasks⟨s0..sn⟩ generated by the Manager G are executed sequentially by Worker modules
⟨w0..wn⟩. Each Worker can take multiple time steps within one episode to complete a subtask si.
Firstly, the combination of the User Task Tu, the subtask si and the contextual information Csi
are used as a query to retrieve similar subtask experience Esi from the Worker’s Episodic Mem-
ory. The Episodic Memory is indexed by the concatenation of the task query, the subtask, and
the contextual information⟨Q, si, Csi⟩, based on the similarity of the embedding. As opposed to
Narrative Memory, Episodic Memory includes a complete plan with specific grounding actions and
only summaries from the subtask trajectories designated as DONE or successful by a Worker. Ad-
ditionally, a Trajectory Reflector submodule T Ri is associated with each worker. This submodule
observes the entire episode as the worker is executing the subtask and provides reflective advice to
the agent—helping it think of alternative strategies and avoid repetitive actions.
Esi = Retrieve(Me,⟨Tu, si, Csi⟩)
The subtask experience Esi and the reflection is used by the Action Generator submodule inside
a Worker to generate a single structured response - consisting of a previous action status check, ob-
servation analysis, semantic next action and grounded next action. This structured response allows
the agent to generate a templated chain-of-thought Wei et al. (2022); Yao et al. (2023) for improved
reasoning and results in a single grounded action aj. This action is passed to the ACI which imple-
ments it in the Desktop Environment. Once the worker reasons that the subtask has been completed,
it generates a special grounded action DONE which signals the successful end of the subtask. The
worker can also optionally generate a FAIL signal, in which case the hierarchical operation is reset
and the Manager replans a new set of subtasks based on the intermediate environment configuration.
3.1.3 S ELF -E VALUATOR : S UMMARIZING EXPERIENCES AS TEXTUAL REWARDS
The Self-Evaluator S is responsible for generating experience summaries as textual rewards r for
the Manager and Worker modules. In the case of the successful end of an episode signaled by the
Worker with a DONE signal, the evaluator observes the complete episode and generates learning
in the form of a summarization of the strategy used by the worker to complete that subtask. This
strategy is fed back into the Worker’s episodic memory Me. In the case of the end of the complete
user-provided task, indicated either by the successful completion of all subtasks or by the maximum
number of steps limit, the evaluator generates a learning signal in the form of the summary of the
entire task completion process. This summary is fed back and saved in the narrative memory Mn
of the Manager. This process of Observations, Hierarchical Action Generation, and Rewards in the
form of textual summaries to update the internal memories of the Manager and Worker mirrors a
classic Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning process - but uses Retrieval as a learning strategy.
3.2 M EMORY CONSTRUCTION AND UPDATE
Initial Memory Construction via Self-supervised Exploration. To bootstrap Narrative Mn and
Episodic Memories Me, Agent S conducts self-supervised exploration on a set of synthetically gen-
erated tasks (see Figure 4). We utilize two methods to create two types of random exploration
tasks: environment-independent tasks and environment-aware tasks. For environment-independent
tasks, we leverage a task generator to generate the top 50 most common tasks from the various
5

Preprint
Narrative & Episodic
Memory
Desktop Environment
Self-supervised Exploration
Continual Memory Update
ACI
ACI
Inference Task
Exploration Tasks
Retrieval
Summarization
Summarization
Web Knowledge
Web Knowledge
Task
Generator
Figure 4: The pipeline of memory construction and update, which contains two phases: Self-
supervised Exploration and Continual Memory Update. The initial Narrative & Episodic Memory
is constructed through some randomly curated tasks during the exploration phase, and then it is up-
dated based on the inference tasks continually.
applications used in OSWorld (Xie et al., 2024) and WindowsAgentArena (Bonatti et al., 2024).
For environment-aware tasks, we take the initial environments of the tasks in OSWorld and Win-
dowsAgentArena and prompt a Task Generator to generate a different task based on the environ-
ment. Both types of tasks consist of the exploration tasks. Then we run Agent S on these tasks by
only taking web knowledge Kweb and collect the full task (Narrative Experience En) and subtask
experiences (Episodic Experience Ee) for the narrative and episodic memories. The key stored in
narrative memory Mn is the query Q and for episodic memory Me, the key is query Q concatenated
with subtask information⟨Q, si, Csi⟩. Through this process, the initial memory is constructed.
Continual Memory Update. As our Agent S interacts with new tasks, it continually updates the
Narrative Memory Mn and Episodic Memory Me, as illustrated in Figure 4. Thus even after the
initial exploration is completed, the agent continues to learn as it encounters and attempts newer,
more novel tasks. This process enables our agent to learn even during inference and retrieve the
learned knowledge to new tasks effectively.
3.3 A GENT-C OMPUTER INTERFACE
Current desktop environments are designed to accommodate two distinct user types: (1) human
users, who can perceive and respond to subtle visual changes in real-time, and (2) software pro-
grams, which execute predefined tasks through scripts and Application Programming Interfaces
(APIs). However, these interfaces are inadequate for MLLM agents tasked with GUI control and ma-
nipulation at the fundamental keyboard-mouse level. These agents operate on a different paradigm:
they respond in slow, discrete time intervals, lack an internal coordinate system, and cannot effi-
ciently process fine-grained feedback after each minor mouse movement or keyboard input. Draw-
ing inspiration from the ACI developed for Software Engineering agents (Yang et al., 2024), we
propose the creation of a novel ACI to bridge the gap between the unique operational constraints of
MLLM agents and the requirements of open-ended GUI-control tasks.
Perception and Grounding. Current MLLMs can effectively reason about certain elements and
features in an image, but they cannot directly ground and pinpoint specific elements in images as
they lack an internal coordinate system. In GUI manipulation, agents need to constantly interact
with fine UI elements, and previous works have shown that grounding is a significant bottleneck in
these agents (Xie et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2024a). Desktop environments, however, provide an
easily parseable Accessibility Tree with coordinate information about almost every element in the
UI. Thus, our ACI design incorporates a dual-input strategy with different purposes for each input.
6

Preprint
The image input is used by the agent to observe salient details about the environment—such as
popups, button states, checking if a previous action worked, and reasoning about the next step. The
accessibility tree input is used for reasoning about the next step and, more importantly, grounding
specific elements in the environment. To achieve this, we tag each element in the accessibility tree
with unique integer tags which can be used by agents when referring to these elements. Furthermore,
while previous works seek to augment the image with information from the accessibility tree (Xie
et al., 2024; Zheng et al., 2024a; Bonatti et al., 2024) using Set-of-Mark Prompting, we augment the
tree with details from the image. To achieve this, we run an OCR module on the image and parse
textual blocks from the screenshot. We then add these blocks to the accessibility tree as interactable
UI elements if they do not already exist in the tree. To check for existing elements, we perform an
IOU (Intersection over Union) match with all elements in the tree.
Constrained Action Space with Concurrent Feedback. Desktop automation has traditionally
relied on APIs and scripts, but adopting these as actions would imply an unbounded combinato-
rial action space of arbitrary executable code. This is unsuitable for keyboard-mouse-level GUI
automation agents because it compromises safety and precision. Code blocks can contain multiple
sequential actions, leaving the agent with neither control over nor feedback from individual steps.
To ensure that actions generated by agents are safely and reliably relayed to the environment and
produce clear and timely feedback, our ACI design incorporates a bounded action space. This space
includes primitive actions like click, type, and hotkey (detailed in Appendix A.1). Agents can refer
to different elements by their tagged IDs, and the ACI translates the ⟨ primitive - ID⟩ information
into executable Python code. Furthermore, the agent is allowed to perform only one discrete action
at each time step, so it can observe immediate feedback from the environment. These actions are
also coarse enough to account for the slow, stateless nature of MLLMs, e.g., the agent can directly
move to and click an element instead of moving the mouse in small increments.
4 E XPERIMENTS
4.1 E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
Benchmarks. We evaluate Agent S on OSWorld (Xie et al., 2024), a benchmark for testing the
multimodal agents’ capability of executing a wide range of computer tasks in a real computer envi-
ronment. This executable environment allows free-form keyboard and mouse control of real com-
puter applications, including OS, Office (LibreOffice Calc, Impress, Writer), Daily (Chrome, VLC
Player, Thunderbird), Professional (VS Code and GIMP), and Workflow (tasks involving multiple
apps). In addition, we also evaluate the generalization of Agent S on WindowsAgentArena (Bonatti
et al., 2024), a contemporaneous benchmark in the Windows operating system.
Settings & Baselines. Since the OSWorld benchmark contains 369 tasks on Ubuntu, for the
backbone model of Agent S, we leverage GPT-4o and Claude-3-Sonnet, respectively. For Win-
dowsAgentArena, we test all 154 tasks on GPT-4o. We use the PaddleOCR2 toolkit as our OCR tool
in augmenting accessibility trees for grounding. The embedding model for the retrieval we use is
text-embedding-3-small. Agent S takes the accessibility tree and screenshot as inputs, so we also use
the reported results in OSWorld (Xie et al., 2024) and WindowsAgentArena (Bonatti et al., 2024)
with same input setting as baselines. The OSWorld baseline takes the coordinates-based accessibil-
ity tree and screenshots as input for spatial grounding to generate the action with coordinates at each
step. The WindowsAgentArena baseline NA VI (Bonatti et al., 2024) utilizes an accessibility tree,
OCR, and Proprietary models to process the screenshot and create Set-of-Marks as input. Its action
space includes a constrained set of primitives but allows multiple actions to be chained together.
4.2 M AIN RESULTS
OSWorld. Table 1 shows the performance comparison between Agent S and the baseline models,
evaluated across the whole OSWorld test set. For the GPT-4o model, Agent S achieves an overall
success rate of 20.58%, nearly doubling the performance of the best corresponding baseline (GPT-
4o with 11.21%). Agent S consistently outperforms the baselines in the “Daily” and “Professional”
tasks, where it reaches 27.06% and 36.73% success rates, respectively, compared to the best base-
2https://github.com/PaddlePaddle/PaddleOCR
7

Preprint
Table 1: Main results of Successful Rate (%) on the OSWorld full test set of all 369 test examples.
Method OS Office Daily Profess. Workflow Overall
Claude-3 12.50 3.57 5.27 8.16 1.00 4.41
Gemini-Pro-1.5 12.50 3.58 7.83 8.16 1.52 5.10
GPT-4V 16.66 6.99 24.50 18.37 4.64 12.17
GPT-4o 41.67 6.16 12.33 14.29 7.46 11.21
Agent S w/ Claude-3.5 41.66 13.83 30.46 32.65 9.54 20.48
Agent S w/ GPT-4o 45.83 13.00 27.06 36.73 10.53 20.58
(a) Open Account Settings:
agent.click(41, 1, “left”)
(b) Remove the Account:
agent.click(86, 1, “left”)
(c) Remove the Account:
agent.click(149, 1, “left”)
Figure 5: A successful example of the Thunderbird task: “Help me to remove the account ‘anonym-
x2024@outlook.com’.” For space concern, (a) (b) (c) demonstrate the screenshots, current subtasks,
and grounding actions at steps 1, 4, and 6, respectively.
line results of 12.33% and 14.29%. These tasks are commonly used in daily life or involved with
knowledge-intensive professional applications, which benefit more from the retrieval augmentation
of Agent S. Both Claude-3.5-Sonnet and GPT-4o outperform the baseline versions across the ma-
jority of tasks. Claude-3.5-Sonnet even performs better than GPT-4o in “Daily” and “Professional”
tasks. The results demonstrate the enhanced capability of Agent S in handling diverse and complex
tasks more effectively than the baseline approaches.
Qualitative Examples. In Figure 5, we illustrate an example of a task from the Thunderbird app
from OSWorld: Help me to remove the account ”anonym-x2024@outlook.com”. Agent S completes
tasks by interacting with the desktop through a combination of actions. More qualitative examples
are demonstrated in Appendix D.1.
4.3 A BLATION STUDY
To demonstrate the effectiveness of individual modules of Agent S, we stratified sampled a subset
of 65 instances, testsub3 from the full test set for the ablation study. Considering the inference cost,
we utilized GPT-4o as the LLM backbone for all ablation studies for both the baseline and Agent S.
Learning from experience enhances the domain knowledge of GUI agents. The Experiential
learning process of Agent S involves searching web knowledge, retrieving full task experience from
narrative memory and retrieving subtask experience from episodic memory. To assess the impact of
different components, we systematically remove each component and observe performance changes
across different task categories. The results are shown in Table 2. Learning from universal experi-
ence available as web knowledge allows Agent S to make informed plans across a wide range of tasks
and has the most significant impact. The learning from Narrative and Episodic memories synergies
effectively with web retrieval, and the results detail how their ablation affects the agent’s ability to
handle complex tasks, underscoring the value of experiential learning. These results demonstrate
that each component plays a critical role in enhancing the agent’s domain knowledge. Removing
all three components (w/o All) degrades the performance significantly, revealing the importance of
learning from experience in the design.
ACI elicits better reasoning abilities of LLMs and supports better agentic learning. Figure 6
presents the results of the ablation study on the ACI module. Comparing the baseline with Agent
3The test small set provided by the OSWorld codebase is too small and imbalanced (only 39 examples in
total and 2 in the OS category) for practical evaluations. Thus, we sample a larger and more balanced subset.
8

Preprint
Table 2: The ablation study of experience-augmented hierarchical planning in OSWorld testsub.
The metric is Successful Rate (%).
Method OS (6) Office (17) Daily (16) Profess. (10) Workflow (16) Overall (65)
baseline (OSWorld Agent) 33.33 5.88 12.50 10.00 6.25 10.77
Agent S 50.00 11.76 37.50 40.00 12.50 26.15
- w/o Web Knowledge 16.60 11.76 24.49 30.00 6.25 16.80
- w/o Narrative Memory 33.33 11.76 36.99 20.00 12.50 21.41
- w/o Episodic Memory 33.33 5.88 25.00 30.00 12.50 18.46
- w/o All 33.33 5.88 18.75 20.00 6.25 13.85
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Success Rate (%)
Agent S 26.15%
Agent S (ACI + Retrieval) 20.00%
Agent S (ACI-only) 12.31%
Baseline + Retrieval 12.31%
Baseline 10.77%
Figure 6: Ablation of ACI in OSWorld testsub.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30
Success Rate (%)
Agent S - w/o Exploration 15.38%
Agent S - w/o Self-Evaluator 18.46%
Agent S - w/o Continual Memory Update 23.18%
Agent S 26.15% Figure 7: Ablation of the memory update mech-
anism in OSWorld testsub.
S (ACI-only)4 highlights the enhanced reasoning abilities achieved by incorporating ACI. Addi-
tionally, we examined the impact of ACI on agentic learning by integrating the Experiential learning
process. For the baseline, adding Experiential learning slightly improved overall performance. How-
ever, when added to Agent S (ACI-only), the performance improved significantly, demonstrating
ACI’s effectiveness in enhancing agentic learning.
Hierarchical Planning supports long-horizon workflows. The (ACI-only + Experiential Learn-
ing) setup in Figure 6 shows Agent S performance without Hierarchical Planning, and the observed
performance drop (26.15% to 20.00%) compared to the full Agent S underscores the importance of
Hierarchical Planning in modeling long-horizon workflows. The effect of hierarchical formulation
becomes pronounced in the presence of Experiential learning as the Manager can generate more
detailed and accurate plans in the subtask planning stage.
Exploration, Continual Memory Update and Self-Evaluator are indispensable for memory
construction. Our agent collects experience in two phases - initially during the self-supervised ex-
ploration phase and then continually as it interacts with new examples (See Figure 4). To assess
the effectiveness of these two learning stages and further examine our Self-evaluator which stores
experience as summaries instead of unfiltered trajectories we run the ablation shown in Figure 7.
Removing exploration limits memory updates to the inference phase only. Removing the contin-
ual memory update means we only use the memory obtained from the exploration phase without
subsequent updates. Removing the self-evaluator involves replacing summarized experiences with
the original full trajectories. The results shown in Figure 7 reveal that ablating both the continual
memory update and self-supervised exploration phases results in a performance drop, with the self-
supervised exploration being much more impactful. The ablation of the Self-Evaluator further shows
the benefits of using summarized trajectories instead of full trajectory exemplars for planning.
4.4 E RROR ANALYSIS
We performed a thorough error analysis on the tasks that Agent S failed within testsub of the OS-
World. There are three types of errors that we observed: (1)Planning Error: A planning error occurs
when the agent generates unsuitable plans for a task, including inaccuracies in the plan, misleading
subtask information, or misalignment of subtask sequence with task requirements. (2) Grounding
Error: A grounding error arises when the agent fails to accurately interact with target elements
despite their visibility and the application of correct reasoning. This includes incorrect element se-
lection or inaccurate coordinate selection due to the inherent limitations of our action space (e.g.,
selecting the center instead of a more precise part of the element). (3) Execution Error: An execu-
tion error emerges when the agent makes incorrect decisions or fails to adjust its behavior during
4This version of Agent S excludes Hierarchical Planning to better study the effects of ACI in isolation.
9

Preprint
Table 3: The statistic of Error Rate (%) on testsub of OSWorld that Agent S failed to complete.
Error Metric OS Office Daily Profess. Workflow Overall
Planning Error 66.67 25.00 30.00 66.67 28.57 34.69
Grounding Error 0.00 75.00 50.00 66.67 35.71 53.06
Execution Error 33.33 87.50 100.00 66.67 71.43 79.59
Subtask Failure 16.67 58.47 62.82 33.61 70.43 57.17
task execution. This includes repetitive actions, diverging from subtask goals, delays in transitioning
between subtasks or violating established protocols by combining multiple actions into one.
Statistic Results of the Errors. We analyzed Agent S’s trajectory for each failed task, identifying
error types based on the definitions provided. A single task may contain multiple errors. We also cal-
culated the Subtask Failure Rate, which measures the average percentage of failed subtasks relative
to total attempts, and the Error Rate, which reflects the proportion of tasks exhibiting a specific error
type. As shown in Table 3, execution and grounding errors are the most common across various task
categories. A case study of error occurrence can be found in Appendix D.2.
4.5 G ENERALIZATION TO DIFFERENT OPERATING SYSTEMS
We test the Agent S framework with no modification on WindowsAgentArena (Bonatti et al., 2024),
a Windows OS benchmark released contemporaneously with our work. We compare Agent S with
the similar configuration5 with GPT-4o as the MLLM backbone, Accessibility Tree + Image as the
input, and parsing with OCR. As shown in Table 4, Agent S outperforms the Navi agent without any
adaptation to the new Windows environment.
Table 4: Results of Successful Rate (%) on WindowsAgentArena using GPT-4o and Image + Ac-
cessibility Tree input on the full test set of all 154 test examples.
Method Office Web Browser Windows System Coding Media & Video Windows Utils Overall
NA VI(Bonatti et al., 2024) 0.0 20.0 29.2 9.1 25.3 0.0 13.3
Agent S 0.0 13.3 45.8 29.2 19.1 22.2 18.2
5 C ONCLUSION
In this work, we present Agent S—A novel framework for developing fully Autonomous Graphical
User Interface (GUI) agents that can perform a wide range of user queries by directly controlling the
keyboard and mouse. Through the Agent S framework, we show the benefits of Learning from Expe-
rience for Task-oriented GUI agents. We also discuss the concept of an Agent Computer Interface for
the GUI domain, arguing in favour of an abstraction layer that allows MLLM agents to perceive and
reason at a language level with rich and continuous feedback. By leveraging Experience-Augmented
Hierarchical Planning, Online Web Knowledge, and an Agent-Computer Interface (ACI), Agent S
demonstrates SOTA performance on the OSWorld benchmark and generalizability across different
operating systems. We demonstrate the potential of MLLM agents to learn from external sources
and through direct interaction with the environment, without any human or environmental feedback
in the GUI agents domain, thus opening a discourse on zero-shot, agentic methods for GUI agents.
Future Work. A key metric that has been unaddressed in existing work on MLLM agents for
computer control, including ours, is the number of agent steps and wall clock time required for task
completion. While our work focuses on achieving significant improvement in task performance,
future work can consider a shortest-path navigation formulation of GUI control and evaluate the
Pareto-optimality of various agents on the dimensions of time and accuracy. In our work, we use
the state-of-the-art GPT-4o and Claude-3.5-sonnet models. However, future work can extend the
ideas of experiential learning and Agent Computer Interface for smaller, open-source MLLMs which
could be fine-tuned to bridge the gap.
5The best-performing agent in WindowsAgentArena is based on an internal closed-sourced model that was
trained for GUI grounding and is not accessible outside of Microsoft now, so we choose a similar configuration
with ours for fair comparison.
10

Preprint
