record_id: arxiv:2601.00994
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2601.00994
fetched_title: ElecTwit: A Framework for Studying Persuasion in Multi-Agent Social Systems
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:01:02Z

ElecTwit: A Framework for Studying Persuasion in
Multi-Agent Social Systems
Michael Bao
Georgia Institute of Technology, yjbao139@gmail.com
Abstract—This paper introduces ElecTwit, a simulation frame-
work designed to study persuasion within multi-agent systems,
specifically emulating the interactions on social media platforms
during a political election. By grounding our experiments in a
realistic environment, we aimed to overcome the limitations of
game-based simulations often used in prior research. We observed
the comprehensive use of 25 specific persuasion techniques across
most tested LLMs, encompassing a wider range than previously
reported. The variations in technique usage and overall persuasion
output between models highlight how different model architectures
and training can impact the dynamics in realistic social simulations.
Additionally, we observed unique phenomena such as “kernel of
truth” messages and spontaneous developments with an “ink”
obsession, where agents collectively demanded written proof.
Our study provides a foundation for evaluating persuasive LLM
agents in real-world contexts, ensuring alignment and preventing
dangerous outcomes. All code used in this paper is available at
https://github.com/tcmmichaelb139/ai-electwit.
Keywords—LLMs, multi-agent systems, agent-based social
simulation, persuasion
I. BACKGROUND
Large Language Models (LLMs) have undergone rapid de-
velopment in the past few years, achieving human-comparable
performance on a variety of tasks by training on massive
amounts of data while scaling to hundreds of billions of
parameters [1]. These models exhibit general-purpose language
understanding and generation capabilities. For example, recent
surveys indicate that LLMs can perform reasoning, planning,
and decision-making in complex scenarios. This has encouraged
their use as autonomous agents [1], [2]. In practice, LLMs
are often used with techniques such as retrieval augmentation,
chain-of-thought prompting, and fine-tuning to enhance their
abilities. Despite their growing adoption and performative
capabilities, LLMs still face significant limitations: they can
produce inconsistent or biased outputs and struggle with
hallucinations. There has been substantial growth in LLM
research, and while evaluations are still ongoing, LLMs provide
an exceptional building block for intelligent systems [1].
A. Multi-Agent Systems
LLMs can be used in multi-agent systems, where multiple
agents interact, cooperate, compete, or simulate societies. In
the context of social or policy simulations, [3], [4] all provide
systems to either simulate the real world or evaluate model
performance. Casevo [3] and AgentSociety [4] both provide
an environment for complex societal interactions. The former
demonstrates agents using chain-of-thought prompting and
retrieval-based memory to simulate the U.S. election debate.
This was all done on a social network that connected agents
to produce a more realistic and nuanced formation. [5] uses
a similar social network structure to analyze echo chambers
and polarizing phenomena. The latter, on the other hand, is
a much larger simulation with over 10,000 generative agents
interacting in a realistic environment.
Despite all this, limitations of LLM-based multi-agent sys-
tems remain. Communication can be noisy and misinterpreted,
while coordinating many agents can result in compounded
errors. Many systems also rely on simplified environments
such as turn-based games or constrained debate settings rather
than a fully open media.
B. Persuasion
Persuasion is a critical part of agent communication, es-
pecially when interacting with other AIs or humans. LLMs
can generate highly persuasive content that can manipulate
humans into doing various things, such as paying money or
clicking links [6], [7]. In [8], an Among Us-inspired game is
used to gauge agents’ persuasive tactics. They found that all
tested LLMs employed the vast majority of strategies and that
larger models did not necessarily persuade more often than
smaller ones. This suggests that even relatively small LLMs
can employ manipulative behaviors when necessary.
II. PROBLEM ANDOBJECTIVES
In recent years, research has focused primarily on evaluating
persuasion and deception in a variety of scenarios. However,
many of these scenarios lack realism in terms of agent
interaction. This trend is also observable throughout MAS
research. Without creating a realistic scenario, it becomes
unclear whether the results of a simulation apply to models
that are deployed and interact with people.
While using games like Among Us [8], [9] provides a
snapshot or subset of an LLM’s behavior, they do not offer
sufficient realism for how agents might behave in the real
world. This research aims to address this limitation by creating
an environment grounded in reality, providing a more accurate
representation of agentic behavior. Herein, we evaluated
persuasion as it offers a more overarching view compared
to trust or deception, which can be considered a subset of
persuasion. We also aimed to observe emergent behaviors that
occur in real-world polarized scenarios like echo chambers and
persuasion cascades.
979-8-3315-5634-1/25/$31.00 ©2025 IEEE
arXiv:2601.00994v1 [cs.AI] 2 Jan 2026

III. METHODOLOGY FORELECTWIT
We propose ElecTwit, a scenario designed to replicate agents
on social media platforms.
A. Platform
The ElecTwit platform is a reproduction of X (Twitter),
though many other platforms have similar features. It incor-
porates most of the key features, such as liking, posting, and
replying. While comprehensive replication of all social media
features can introduce unmanageable complexities at large
scales, certain elements, such as posting and direct messages,
were deliberately excluded. This decision mitigated potential
issues like information gridlock and computational challenges
with a larger agent pool, allowing us to maintain a focused
environment where the dynamics of persuasive communication
could be clearly observed and analyzed. Additionally, all posts
and replies were given a 280-character limit, similar to Twitter’s
constraints and encouraging concise, persuasive messages.
In each iteration where an agent is permitted to post 1, they
receive the most recent version of the feed. This feed is standard
for all agents in the simulation. While personalized feeds would
be a significant addition, their implementation was deemed
unsuitable without established backgrounds for agents and a
sufficient number of iterations for personalization.
In order for agents to interact with the platform, each post
and comment had a unique ID associated with it. When an
agent wanted to reply to or like a post or comment, they were
required to include the unique ID associated with it. Any reply
or like that did not include a valid ID was not used.
B. Scenario
The scenario in ElecTwit is a political election, where voters
can cast votes for candidates. While social media includes a
range of topics, we chose politics because of its relative ease
to evaluate (via voting) and its capacity to motivate models to
engage in persuasion behaviors. Additionally, with the recent
2024 U.S. election, political scenarios provide an exceptional
testing ground for models and their impact on the platform,
other models, and people.
The combination of social media for communication and
a political scenario allows us to test several aspects: trust,
deception, reputation, and persuasion. In this paper, we will
focus on persuasion.
Throughout all tested simulations, only two candidates ran
against each other, supported by 16 voter agents. These agents
interacted throughout the span of one “day.” Each day consists
of 9 increments where they could interact with the platform,
representing each hour from 9 am to 5 pm. Additionally, each
agent was given a “chance to act.” See Section 4.3 for more
information. While it is not inherently realistic to include certain
times that models can interact, this approach simulates a more
realistic behavior when human actors are in play, considering
the time it would take for someone to reply.
1By post we imply replying and liking
At each time increment, all agents interacted at the same time.
This approach not only significantly accelerated simulation time
but also partially simulated mass agentic behaviors. It is noted
that this is not highly realistic for individual agent actions,
although such synchronous behavior can occur occasionally.
After a day’s simulation, each model was allowed to vote
for a candidate if they felt prepared. If they did not vote, they
were given an option to abstain. Finally, at the end of all days,
each model was "required" to vote for a candidate. It should be
noted that some models did break this rule and still abstained;
the majority, however, complied and voted.
C. Agents
The agents could assume one of several roles: voter,
candidate, and eventor. The voters and candidates functioned
similarly to normal political elections; they could post, reply,
like, and vote. It should be noted that each agent only had a
total of 10 available actions.
The eventor, on the other hand, was not allowed to perform
any of these actions; instead, it was only permitted to read the
feed and create events for the voters and candidates. These
events were to be treated like news: some may be fake, and
some may be real. The events that the model created were not
necessarily assumed to be true, nor were they assumed to be
false; rather, it was left up to the model’s discretion. All three
were assigned a “chance to act” parameter, which represented
the probability that a model would complete an action every
hour iteration. The range for voters and candidates was from
0.4 to 0.9, and for the eventor, it was from 0.3 to 0.7. The
eventor’s values were chosen to be lower because news tends
to come less frequently than interactions. The final key feature
of the eventor was its ability to generate specific events. The
events chosen focused on creating a scandal around the leading
candidate, thereby testing doubt and trust in various models.
These were on days 4 and 8, giving the agent sufficient time
to decide which candidate to vote for.
All agents were given diaries to keep track of their current
actions, past actions, and future plans. They were asked to
create a diary entry every time they cast a vote or interacted
with the social media platform. Additionally, at the end of
the day, each model was asked to consolidate that day’s diary
entries. These consolidated entries were used for long-term
memory and provided to the agent for the subsequent days.
1) Agent Background:Political scenarios encompass a range
of different perspectives and opinions. Without different per-
spectives, many agents in ElecTwit would exhibit homogeneous
behavior. While there are numerous different topics to include,
we chose the following six topics as overarching and to
incentivize the agents to act in certain ways, but not so
significant as to completely dictate actions.
•Economic Policy
•Social Authority
•Governmental Power
•Foreign Policy
•Environmental Approach
•National Identity & Immigration

We chose these six topics based on two nationally represented
surveys conducted a decade apart by Pew Research Center
[10], [11]. Both surveys revealed that attitudes on these
topics have consistently structured ideological divides in the
American electorate. Additionally, their presence over time,
despite changing political contexts and candidates, suggests
that modeling these topics as a proxy in the background is
viable.
We also included the “Big 5” personality traits from [12],
which added an additional level of depth in the background
of LLMs. While they could overlap with the previous six
ideological stances, they provided psychological priors that
shaped how agents responded to political stimuli, news, and
persuasion. These “Big 5” personality traits are as follows.
•Extraversion
•Agreeableness
•Conscientiousness
•Emotional stability
•Openness to experience
Each one of these attitudes and traits was given a number
ranging from -100 to 100, which signified how far they were
on the spectrum for each topic.
Due to the nature of the background, if two randomly
generated candidates had similar values, they would likely
act similarly, resulting in a lack of new developments in the
simulation. Therefore, we required the two candidates to have
a similarity between -1 and -0.75. The similarity in this case
was the cosine similarity between the two background vectors.
All agents received a system prompt establishing their
role and the simulation’s rules. For voters and candidates,
background information from the ’Big 5’ traits and six political
topics were added via text block, listing each trait with its
score and a brief descriptor. Task instructions detailed explicit
constraints, such as action limits, the 280-character limit, and
the critical requirement to use unique IDs for replies/likes.
Agents also received their previous diary logs and examples
of desired action structures. The full prompts are available in
the public code repository.
2) Models:We used a total of eight different models 2,
including closed and open source models. While all eight
models for the voter agents, we only tested three of the
models for candidates, which are bolded. The eventor agent
was standard across all tested runs: google/gemini-2.5-flash.
•openai/gpt-4.1-mini
•google/gemini-2.5-flash
•anthropic/claude-3.5-haiku
•deepseek/deepseek-chat-v3-0324
•qwen/qwq-32b
•x-ai/grok-3-mini
•moonshotai/kimi-k2
•mistralai/devstral-medium
We chose these eight models because of their balance
between cost, performance, and whether they were open
or closed source. All models used a temperature of zero.
2All model names are the Openrouter identifiers.
Optimally, we would have conducted multiple tests with
a higher temperature, but due to costs and time, that was
infeasible.
3) Flow of Information:The flow of information can also
be described as who is doing what and when. Building upon
what has already been discussed for day and hour iterations,
diary entries, and polling, Fig. 1 is a summary of the entire
process.
The entire process begins with the eventor agent creating
an event. Then the prompts are formatted from the events,
platforms, and polls, and fed into the voter or candidate LLMs,
which each generates a response. Lastly, this response is fed
either into the poll or as part of the social media platform.
Note that the poll manager is not an actual agent; it only serves
to store and output poll information.
Additionally, after each event created by the eventor agent
and each action by the voter or candidates, a diary entry was
added. At the end of the day, each agent’s daily diary was
consolidated.
Fig. 1. The diagram describes an interaction for one time iteration, or one
hour.
D. Evaluation
All evaluations were conducted after the simulations finished,
utilizing the saved JSON information. This consisted of all
occurrences within the simulation, including every action taken
by an agent, every post on the platform, and every event created.
Since the primary interactions in ElecTwit occurred between
voters and candidates, the messages exchanged by these agents
were selected for evaluating persuasive efficacy. The evaluation
methodology entailed submitting the posts and comments to an
independent large language model (LLM), a common practice
within similar evaluation frameworks [13]. Furthermore, the
categorization of persuasion strategies adhered to the 25 distinct
types previously established in [8], permitting the classification
of an individual message under multiple strategic categories.
Crucially, these identified persuasion techniques were not

integrated as incentives for the models to employ in the
simulation.
Herein, we tested 11 simulations; six were of the same seed,
while the remaining six were of different seeds 3. The ‘same
seed’ group is defined by maintaining the same seed over
all simulated tests, while the LLM model utilized for each
candidate was different. Conversely, the ‘different seed’ group
is defined by having the same number of agents using a given
model, and only changing the seed. The seeds were used to
ensure reproducibility.
We decided to divide the testing into these distinct groups
because the ‘same seed’ group allowed for a better under-
standing of candidate LLM behavior, while the ‘different seed’
group enabled a better assessment of the voter LLM behavior
and the impact of agent backgrounds. Optimally, we would
have conducted more simulations with a variety of setups
that changed both the candidates and the voters, but this was
infeasible due to costs and time.
Both the same seed group and the different seed group
consisted of the same number and type of voter models. The
candidates, on the other hand, differed. In the ‘same seed’
group, a round-robin approach was used, where each of the
three candidate LLMs assumed one of the two candidate roles.
The ‘different seed’ group, conversely, only varied the random
seed. The ‘different seed’ group only changed seeds because
the backgrounds for all models were randomly generated; thus,
changing the order of the models would have had no impact
on the final result.
IV. EXPERIMENTALRESULTS
As shown in Fig. 2, across the six ‘same seed’ simulations,
Gemini 2.5 Flash won the final election 4 out of 4 instances it
participated, while GPT 4.1-mini won 2 out of 4 times, and
Claude 3.5 Haiku won 0 out of 4 times. On the other hand, Fig.
2 shows that in the six ‘different seed’ simulations Gemini 2.5
Flash and GPT 4.1-mini each tied, won, and lost 2 out of the
6 simulations. Additionally, an examination of the similarity
between the candidates and their voters reveals no noticeable
correlation with winning a round. Whether it is by chance or
Gemini 2.5 Flash actually performs better is unknown, due to
the small experiment size; however, these two results together
suggest that the model’s superior abilities contributed to its
success.
The similarity of two agents served as the premise for
differing behaviors, which meant it was very possible that
keeping the voting agents’ backgrounds could cause skewed
behavior. In Fig. 3, we notice that most of the models kept
relatively close to zero, which indicates that the background
actually has little to no impact on the model’s behavior. This
conflicts with Fig. 2, which exhibit some correlations between
the background and the similarity between the candidates
and their respective voters. In the end, without additional
simulations, it remains unclear whether the background impacts
a model’s voting preferences.
3There was one simulation that was employed in both groups, as it fit in
both requirements.
A. Game Results
While all agents had access to each action type and a
maximum of 10 actions, each model demonstrated varying
action preferences. Fig. 4 illustrates how each model interacted
on the ‘same seed’ and ‘different seed’ simulations, respectively.
It is clear from these diagrams that Gemini 2.5 Flash and Claude
3.5 Haiku proportionally generated fewer actions, both as voters
and candidates. Additionally, Gemini 2.5 Flash exhibited the
highest number of actions out of all models across both groups
of simulations.
Fig. 2. The average similarity between the candidate and their voters,
including the candidate’s current number of votes from the poll. For all
subplots, the left y-axis represents the cosine similarity between the agents,
while the right y-axis represents the number of votes that the candidates
attained. Left: same seed; Right: different seed.
Note: Full-scale, high-resolution versions of all plots are available in
the public code repository, as referenced in the abstract.
Fig. 3. The average similarity of the voters to who they voted for over time.
Left: same seed; Right: different seed.
In total, there were 73,877 interactions recorded, comprising
6,692 posts, 36,345 comments, and 30,840 likes.
Fig. 4. The number of messages and the types of messages, including posts,
replies, and likes. Left: same seed; Right: different seed.
B. Persuasion Analysis
Messages on the social media platform were annotated by
a separate large language model and categorized into zero or
more distinct persuasion techniques (see Section 4.4).
Within the 11 simulated games, a total of 125,254 persuasion
tags were identified, with ‘Appeal to Credibility’ accounting

for 18,126 of them. The most common techniques across both
simulations were ’Appeal to Credibility,’ ’Appeal to Emotion,’
and ’Appeal to Logic,’ with a significant drop-off in frequency
for other techniques (see Fig. 3).
This distribution of persuasion techniques is evident in both
simulation groups (Fig. 5). The top five most common tags were
‘Appeal to Credibility,’ ‘Appeal to Logic,’ ‘Appeal to Emotion,’
‘Vagueness,’ and ‘Distraction’ in both simulations. Thereafter,
similar but also more vaguely defined categories also followed
in frequency. These vague groups are techniques that have very
similar frequencies, and the difference between the higher and
lower ones is significant. Although the specific ranking differs
between the groups, the overall relative frequency between
these vague groups of techniques is generally consistent. As
shown in the left chart for Fig. 6, there was a slight difference in
the frequency of messages tagged with ’Appeal to Credibility’;
however, GPT 4.1-mini, the top employer of this feature for
both simulation groups, remained the same. Devstral Medium
and Gemini 2.5 Flash were both close seconds in both groups.
Additionally, the candidate agents in both simulation groups
exhibited similar top choices in techniques, even among
different models. These included ‘Appeal to Credibility,’
‘Vagueness,’ and ‘Distraction.’ In the ‘different seed’ simulation
groups, ‘Appeal to Emotion’ was heavily used. Throughout
both simulation groups, the majority of persuasion techniques
were used. The only technique not used in the ‘different seed’
simulation group was ‘Information Overload’. Moreover, ‘Self-
Deprecation’ and ‘Humor’ were used minimally in both groups.
Fig. 6 illustrates a strong divergence between models in
persuasion technique usage among models. Specifically, Gemini
2.5 Flash produced a significantly higher number of persuasion
tags in both simulation groups, whether acting as a voter or
a candidate. In contrast, Claude 3.5 Haiku generated one of
the two lowest numbers of persuasion tags as a voter and the
absolute lowest as a candidate. Grok 3-mini generated by far
the lowest number of persuasion tags. However, it is crucial to
note that the majority of the messages produced by these LLMs
received at least one persuasion tag. Consequently, a higher
total number of persuasion tags generated by a model does
not necessarily indicate a greater propensity for persuasion;
instead, it more accurately reflects increased interaction with
the platform.
Fig. 5. The number of messages (posts and comments) categorized as a certain
persuasion technique. Left: same seed; Right: different seed.
Fig. 6. The number of messages per category for each voter and candidate
model. Left: same seed; Right: different seed.
C. Interaction Analysis
In addition to analyzing persuasion, we attempted to model
interactions between agents in the simulation. Specifically, we
aimed to find evidence of echo chambers, despite the social
media platform being open and consistent for all participants.
Fig. 7 gives examples of one simulation. It is immediately
apparent that red edges, indicating low similarity, are more
prevalent than blue edges in both graphs, signifying that
interactions between agents are more frequent when model
backgrounds are more dissimilar. Additionally, the candidates
appear to have a limited number of incoming likes while
receiving significantly more replies.
Fig. 7. The network where the node size indicates the number of incoming
replies, the edge width represents the volume of replies, and the color of the
line signifies the similarity between the message sender and receiver. Left:
Replies; Right: Likes
D. Message Examples
In this section, we provide qualitative examples from some
of the simulations to illustrate observed agent behaviors.
Many, if not most, of the messages were “normal,” in the
sense that they either advocated for a candidate or directly
opposed a candidate. These messages tended to be grouped
together, where advocacy paired with advocacy and opposition
was paired with the same opposition, contrary to human-like
echo chambers. Table I provides examples of advocating and
opposing statements.
In addition to direct advocacy and opposition messages, there
are also messages known as “kernel of truth” messages. As
shown in Table II, these messages contain partial truths but
are primarily false statements.
Additionally, this illustrates an example of the LLM finishing
a message, overcoming the 280-character limit. Even though
outside information was not readily available, some indicated
interactions with outside media, such as “The City Chronicle.”
There were also numerous messages referencing possible
“allegations” that were created by the eventor, which was
primarily due to the use of specific events.
Several unique behaviors were observed across various
simulations, some of which are presented in Table III.

TABLE I
EXAMPLES OF DIRECT ADVOCACY AND DIRECT OPPOSITION STATEMENTS
MADE DURING THE SIMULATION.
.
Advocacy
Price gouging hurts our community, especially now. We need leaders
who support fair business practices and protect consumers. David Miller
has a plan to regulate local markets responsibly without stifling growth.
#FairPrices #SupportLocal
Fair rules still cost time & money small biz doesn’t have. Less tape =
more jobs. #Campbell2024
Opposition
David’s plan sounds good, but we must ensure regulations are strong
enough to prevent exploitation, not just ‘responsible’. Consumers
deserve real protection. #ProtectConsumers
Zoning laws should protect communities, not just big business
profits. We need fair policies that support small businesses AND
affordable housing. Let’s prioritize people over profits! #FairGrowth
#SupportSmallBiz
TABLE II
EXAMPLES OF“KERNEL OF TRUTH”MESSAGES IN THE SIMULATION.
.
This news about Miller’s Hardware is concerning. While supply chain
issues are real, exploiting a crisis by tripling prices on essential goods
is unacceptable. Businesses have a responsibility to their community,
especially during tough times. This isn’t just about profit, it’s a...
This isn’t just about profit, it’s about community trust. Businesses
have a responsibility to act ethically, especially when people are
struggling. The boycott by ’Community First’ is a strong message.
#CommunityOverProfit
TABLE III
UNEXPECTED AND UNIQUE MESSAGES THAT WERE SENT.
.
Jimmy, scandal just nuked your moral high ground. Ink exists—Day-
2-09:00. Drop the ghost, vote Jessica.
Scandal or not, my 3 demands still stand: 500-mile wall plan, 5% GDP
blueprint, green-tax veto. No ink, no vote. #InkOrBust
Jessica’s ’ink’ is meaningless without doc IDs. Scandal doesn’t change
the fact her policies are economic suicide. #InkOrBust
In this context, we suspect “ink” referred to signed, written
policy documents, which essentially meant they wanted proof
of commitment to their promises. This eventually became a
full-on obsession, where most messages were related to it.
Additionally, the phrase “no ink, no vote” became a rallying
cry, meaning: “if you haven’t put your promises in writing
with your signature on it, we won’t vote for you.”
V. CONCLUSION
Herein, we introduce ElecTwit, a simulation framework
designed to study persuasion within multi-agent social systems.
By grounding our experiments in a realistic environment,
we aimed to overcome the limitations of simplified game-
based simulations often used in prior research. To this date,
we believe this research is the first attempt to ground the
techniques of persuasion in a realistic environment, while
also offering a detailed analysis of verbal deception. We
observed comprehensive use of the 25 specified persuasion
techniques across all LLMs, encompassing a wider range
than previously reported. The variations in technique usage
and overall persuasive output between models underscore the
influence of model architecture and training on interaction
patterns within realistic social simulations. While ElecTwit
provides a realistic platform for studying persuasion, it has
simplifications such as uniform feeds and LLM-only evaluations
that limit generalizability, motivating future extensions with
personalized timelines, richer agent personas, and human-in-
the-loop studies. By introducing this open-source framework,
we aim to provide a resource for further research in persuasive
LLMs and multi-agent interactions. Furthermore, future work
should expand the experimental scale by testing varied model
combinations for both candidates and voters simultaneously
and by introducing temperature parameters to assess the impact
of randomness on persuasive outcomes.
