record_id: arxiv:2506.11060
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2506.11060
fetched_title: Code Researcher : D EEP RESEARCH AGENT FOR LARGE SYSTEMS CODE AND COMMIT HISTORY
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:57Z

Preprint
Code Researcher : D EEP RESEARCH AGENT FOR
LARGE SYSTEMS CODE AND COMMIT HISTORY
Ramneet Singh∗ Sathvik Joel∗ Abhav Mehrotra Nalin Wadhwa
Ramakrishna B Bairi Aditya Kanade Nagarajan Natarajan
Microsoft Research
{ramneet2001,ksjoe30,abhavm1,nalin.wadhwa02}@gmail.com
{ram.bairi,kanadeaditya,nagarajan.natarajan}@microsoft.com
Filtered Context Memory
Crash Report
Analysis Trajectory
Write the results of actions to memory
Generate the patch
Filter the contents
of memory
Take multiple
actions to discover
more information
if enough context is
gathered
then go to step
else reason over the
memory using strategiesCrash Report
Crash Report
Rich development
history
Crash reproducing script
FailureSuccess
Codebase
Global interactions
Large and complex
Crash Report
Noisy
Multiple
stack traces
Ambiguous
Reasoning Strategies
Causal analysis over historic commits
Chasing control and data flow chains
Searching patterns and anti-patterns
Actions
search_code(regex)
search_definition(sym)
search_commits(regex)
Context
Memory
Code
snippets
Past
commits
Symbol
definitions
Analysis
Patch
Synthesis
12
3
4
4
5
Validation
Inputs
Figure 1: Code Researcher conducts deep research over code in three phases: (1) Starting with
the codebase and crash report as input, the ANALYSIS phase performs multi-step reasoning about
semantics, patterns, and commit history of code. It gathers context in a memory. (2) The SYNTHESIS
phase filters the contents of the memory to keep relevant context and generates a patch. (3) The
VALIDATION phase uses external tools to validate the patch.
ABSTRACT
Large Language Model (LLM)-based coding agents have shown promising results
on coding benchmarks, but their effectiveness on systems code remains underex-
plored. Due to the size and complexities of systems code, making changes to a
systems codebase requires researching about many pieces of context, derived from
the large codebase and its massive commit history,before making changes. Inspired
by the recent progress on deep research agents, we design the first deep research
agent for code, called Code Researcher , and apply it to the problem of generating
patches to mitigate crashes reported in systems code. Code Researcher performs
multi-step reasoning about semantics, patterns, and commit history of code to
retrieve all relevant context from the codebase and its commit history. We evaluate
Code Researcher on kBenchSyz (Mathai et al., 2024), a benchmark of Linux kernel
crashes, and show that it significantly outperforms strong baselines, achieving a
crash-resolution rate (CRR) of 48%, compared to 31.5% by SWE-agent (Yang
et al., 2024) and 31% by Agentless (Xia et al., 2024), using OpenAI’s GPT-4o
model. Scaling up sampling budget to 10 trajectories increases Code Researcher ’s
CRR to 54%. Code Researcher is also robust to model choices, reaching 67% with
the newer Gemini 2.5-Flash model. Through another experiment on an open-source
multimedia software, we show the generalizability of Code Researcher and also
conduct ablations. Our experiments highlight the importance of global context
gathering and multi-faceted reasoning for large codebases.
∗Equal contribution
1
arXiv:2506.11060v2 [cs.SE] 20 May 2026

Preprint
1 I NTRODUCTION
Automating coding using Large Language Models (LLMs) and LLM-based agents is a very active area
of research. Popular benchmarks like LiveCodeBench (Jain et al., 2024) and SWE-bench (Jimenez
et al., 2024) respectively test coding abilities on standalone competitive coding problems and GitHub
issues over library or application code. Despite the demonstrated progress of coding agents on these
benchmarks, they are yet to scale to complex tasks over an important class of code, systems code.
Systems code powers critical and foundational software like operating systems, networking stacks,
cloud infrastructure and system utilities. Systems codebases have multiple dimensions of complexity.
Firstly, they are very large, with thousands of files and millions of lines of code. Secondly, systems
code often interfaces directly with the hardware and is performance critical. This results in complex
low-level code (involving pointer manipulations, compile-time macros, etc.) in languages like C/C++,
and global interactions between different parts of the codebase for concurrency, memory management,
maintenance of data-structure invariants, etc. Finally, foundational systems codebases have rich
development histories spanning years or even decades, containing contributions by thousands of
developers, which are important references on legacy design decisions and code changes.
We consider the problem of generating patches to mitigate crashes reported in systems code. This is a
uniquely challenging setting, as opposed to the SWE-bench (Jimenez et al., 2024) like setting tackled
by many prior works (Yang et al., 2024; Jain et al., 2025; Ouyang et al., 2025) using LLMs and SLMs
in coding agents. SWE-bench contains human-written issue descriptions from moderately-sized
codebases, which explain the nature of the bug and might indicate which files are likely relevant.
Coding agents (Yang et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025) are designed to take advantage of this and
quickly navigate the repository to reach the buggy files. In fact, an Agentless (Xia et al., 2024)
approach, which has a simpler, fixed workflow of localizing the files to edit followed by repair,
performs competitively on SWE-bench. These approaches do not expend much efforts in gathering
codebase-wide, global context. In our setting, the bugs are described by stack traces which are devoid
of natural language hints and contain a much larger number of files and functions than an issue
description. Due to the nature of crash reports and the complex global interactions in large systems
codebases, multi-step reasoning and context gathering become important.
Automating such complex tasks in systems codebases requires a different type of agents, agents
that can research about many pieces of context, derived automatically from the large codebase
and its massive commit history,before making changes. Recently, deep research agents have been
developed to solve complex, knowledge-intensive problems that require careful context gathering
and multi-step reasoning, before synthesizing the answer. The agents and techniques have mostly
focused on long-form document generation or complex question-answering over web contents (Shao
et al., 2024; OpenAI, 2025b; Google, 2025a; Perplexity, 2025; Li et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2025b) and
enterprise data (Anthropic, 2025; Microsoft, 2025). Inspired by these advances, we propose the first
deep research agent for code, called Code Researcher , and apply it to the problem of generating
patches for mitigating crashes reported in systems code.
As shown in Figure 1, Code Researcher works in three phases: (1) ANALYSIS : Starting with the
crash report and the codebase, this phase performs multi-step reasoning over semantics, patterns, and
commit history of code. The “Reasoning Strategies” block shows the reasoning strategies used. Each
reasoning step is followed by invocations of tools (labeled “Actions” in Figure 1) to gather context
over the codebase and its commit history. The information gathered is stored in a context memory
and when the agent is able to conclude that it has gathered sufficient context, it moves to the next
phase. (2) SYNTHESIS : The SYNTHESIS phase uses the crash report, the context memory, and the
reasoning trace of the ANALYSIS phase to filter out irrelevant memory contents. Then, it generates
patches, which may edit one or more buggy code snippets from memory, possibly spread across
multiple files. (3) VALIDATION : Finally, the VALIDATION phase checks if the generated patches
prevent the crash from occurring using external tools. A successful patch is presented to the user.
We evaluate the effectiveness of Code Researcher on the kBenchSyz benchmark (Mathai et al.,
2024), containing 279 Linux kernel crashes detected by the Syzkaller fuzzer (Google, 2025b). This
benchmark is challenging because the Linux kernel (Torvalds, 1991) is a canonical example of
a systems codebase with complex low-level code and massive size ( 75K files and 28M lines of
code), and has rich development history. Code Researcher resolves 48% of crashes using GPT-4o
and 5 sampled patches, significantly outperforming the two strong and popular baselines of SWE-
2

Preprint
agent (Yang et al., 2024) (31.5%) and Agentless (Xia et al., 2024) ( 31%) in the same setting (and
customized for the kernel crash resolution task). A concurrent work, CrashFixer (Mathai et al., 2025),
explores a simpler setting where the agent is provided the ground-truth buggy files to edit (theassisted
setting), whereas, Code Researcher takes only the crash report as input (the unassisted setting).
Code Researcher benefits from scaling inference compute, reaching 54% with pass@10, and is
robust to the choice of model, resolving 67% of crashes with the newer Gemini 2.5-Flash LLM.
It gathers context of high coverage and quality, exploring about 10 files per trajectory compared
to a much smaller number 1.33 of files explored by SWE-agent. We demonstrate the importance
of causal analysis over historical commits, a novel feature of Code Researcher . To ensure that
the proposed patches do not break existing functionality, we run Linux kernel unit tests on Code
Researcher’s crash-resolving patches. Though expensive to run, this provides additional validation
beyond the crash-reproduction testing in kBenchSyz. We give evidence of the generalizability of
Code Researcher by experimenting on an open-source multimedia software, FFmpeg (FFmpeg, 2025),
where it resolves 7/10 crashes tested.
In summary, we make the following main contributions:
(1) We design the first deep research agent for code, Code Researcher , capable of handling large
systems code and resolving crashes. Recognizing the importance of commit history in systems code,
we equip the agent with a tool to efficiently search over commit histories.
(2) We evaluate Code Researcher on the challenging kBenchSyz benchmark (Mathai et al., 2024)
and achieve a crash resolution rate of 54%, outperforming strong baselines and showing robust
performance across model choices, reaching 67% with the newer Gemini 2.5-Flash model. We also
demonstrate its generalizability through experiments on a multimedia software, FFmpeg.
(3) Through a comprehensive evaluation, we show (i) how our deep research agent outperforms
agents that do not focus on gathering relevant context, (ii) that this advantage persists even if the
existing SOTA agent is given higher inference-time compute, and (iii) that reasoning models improve
performance significantly if given well-researched context. We thoroughly validateCode Researcher’s
crash-resolving patches using the Linux kernel unit test-suite in addition to the validation setup in
kBenchSyz, providing confidence that they do not break existing functionality. Further ablations
show the importance of (i) causal analysis over historical commits and (ii) memory filtering.
2 R ELATED WORK
The LLM-powered software development subfield has produced several coding agents (Yang et al.,
2024; Xia et al., 2024; Wang et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2024; Wadhwa et al., 2024), predominantly
evaluated on SWE-bench (Jimenez et al., 2024). SWE-bench focuses on GitHub issues from small to
medium-sized Python repositories. However, systems code, the focus of our work, presents unique
challenges. We highlight and contrast key related work in this context. A related, but orthogonal line
of exploration is long context reasoning. But it has its own challenges, as discussed in Appendix F.
Coding agents Agents like SWE-agent (Yang et al., 2024) or OpenHands (Wang et al., 2025) use
a single ReAct-style (Yao et al., 2023) loop endowed with shell commands or specialized tools for
file navigation and editing. However, they tend to explore a small number of files per bug, without
gathering and reasoning over the relevant codebase-wide context. AutoCodeRover (Zhang et al.,
2024) uses tools based on program structure to traverse the codebase (albeit limited to Python code).
It performs explicit localization of the functions/classes to edit using these tools, and those are later
repaired. Code Researcher does not explicitly localize the functions to edit; instead it gathers relevant
context for patch generation and decides what to edit in the SYNTHESIS phase. Some recent coding
agents construct a dependency graph of the repository (Ouyang et al., 2025; Chen et al., 2025), which
they then explore using approaches like MCTS (Ma et al., 2025). However, such agents are (1) limited
to Python code and (2) scale very poorly, making it impractical to use on codebases of the scale of
the Linux kernel. Code Researcher instead uses simple and scalable tooling to handle such codebases
easily. Code Researcher is also the first agent to use causal analysis over historical commits; this is
critical to handling subtle bugs introduced by code evolution in long-lived systems codebases.
Deep research agents Deep research is a fast emerging subfield in agentic AI (Microsoft, 2025;
OpenAI, 2025b; Google, 2025a; Perplexity, 2025), to tackle complex, knowledge-intensive tasks, that
can take hours or days even for experts. Academic work so far has focussed on long-form document
generation (Godbole et al., 2024; Shao et al., 2024), scientific literature review (Wu et al., 2025b;
3

Preprint
Gottweis et al., 2025), and complex question-answering (Li et al., 2025; Wu et al., 2025a) based
on the web corpus. The key challenges in deep research for such complex tasks include (a) intent
disambiguation, (b) exploring multiple solution paths (breadth of exploration), (c) deep exploration
(iterative tool interactions and reasoning), and (d) grounding (ensuring that the claims in the response
are properly attributed). Most of the aforementioned challenges also apply to our setting. To the best
of our knowledge, our work is the first to design and evaluate a deep research strategy for complex
bug resolution in large codebases. Most recently, OpenAI’s Deep Research model has been integrated
with GitHub repos for report generation and QA over codebases (OpenAI, 2025a). However, (a) it
does not support agentic tasks like bug fixing, and (b) their indexing technique does not scale to very
large codebases like the Linux kernel, whereas we use scalable tools for search.
Automated kernel bug detection and repair Prior work for detecting Linux kernel bugs includes
various types of sanitizers, e.g., Kernel Address Sanitizer (KASAN) (Google, 2025a), and the
Syzkaller kernel fuzzer (Google, 2025b), an unsupervised coverage-guided fuzzer that tries to find
inputs to crash the kernel. Code Researcher, complementary to this, generates patches from crash
reports. We use some traditional software engineering concepts like deviant pattern detection (Engler
et al., 2001) and reachability analysis (Nielson et al., 2015), but leverage LLMs to scale to large
codebases. As noted earlier, CrashFixer (Mathai et al., 2025) targets Linux kernel crashes but assumes
that buggy files are known a priori. This assumption is unrealistic for large codebases like the Linux
kernel. In contrast, Code Researcher autonomously locates buggy files using general search tools.
3 D ESIGN OF Code Researcher
Large systems codebases, owing to their critical nature, undergo strict code development and review-
ing practices by expert developers. The bugs that still sneak in are subtle and involve violations of
global invariants (e.g., a data structure should be accessed only after acquiring a lock) and coding
conventions (e.g., use of a specific macro to allocate memory), and unintended side effects caused
by past changes. To fix such bugs, an agent needs to gather sufficient context from the codebase
and its commit history, before generating hypotheses about the cause of a bug and attempt to fix it.
With this insight, we design our deep research agent, Code Researcher . As shown in Figure 1, Code
Researcher comprises of three phases: (1) ANALYSIS , (2) SYNTHESIS and (3) VALIDATION . We
present the key details of our design in this section and complement it with implementation details in
Appendix B. We also explain an example trajectory of Code Researcher in Appendix C.
3.1 A NALYSIS PHASE
The ANALYSIS phase of Code Researcher is responsible for performing deep research to understand
the cause of a reported crash. We equip this phase with (a) actions to efficiently search over the
codebase and the commit history and (b) reasoning strategies for code. At each step, the actions taken
so far along with their results are stored in a context memory, which is used to construct the prompt.
3.1.1 A CTIONS TO SEARCH OVER CODEBASE AND COMMIT HISTORY
We support the following actions: (1)search_definition(sym): To search for the definition(s)
of the specified symbol, which can be the name of a function, struct, global constant, union or macro
and so on. It can be optionally passed a file name to limit the search. (2) search_code(regex):
To search the codebase for matches to the specified regular expression. This is a simple yet powerful
tool, which can be used for searching for any coding pattern such as call to a function, dereferences
to a pointer, assignment to a variable and so on. (3) search_commits(regex): To search for
matches to a regular expression over commit messages and diffs associated with the commits. The
regular expression offers expressiveness, e.g., to search for occurrence of a term (“memory leak”) in
the commit messages or coding patterns in code changes (diffs). In addition, the agent can invoke (4)
done to indicate that it has finished the ANALYSIS phase and (5) close_definition(sym):
To remove the definition of a symbol from the memory if the symbol is deemed irrelevant to the task.
3.1.2 R EASONING STRATEGIES FOR CODE
We ask the agent to explore the codebase to figure out the root cause of a crash and gather sufficient
context to propose a fix. We induce the following reasoning strategies through prompting to guide
4

Preprint
the exploration of the codebase and its commit history. As shown in Figure 1, each reasoning step is
followed by one or more actions. Additionally, we present the agent with a simple scratchpad, where
it can add important discoveries for future reference.
Chasing control and data flow chainsThe control flow (Nielson et al., 2015) of a code snippet refers
to the functions that are called and the branches in it, including conditional statements, loops, gotos
and even conditional compilation macros. Given a crash report and some code, the agent is asked to
reason about control flow to understand how execution flows between different functions and how it
leads to the crash. Similarly, data flow (Nielson et al., 2015) refers to how the values of variables
get passed to different functions and how one variable is used to define another. So the agent should
also reason about how data flows in the code. As a result of this reasoning, the agent may invoke
a search_definition(sym) action to search for the definition of sym if it suspects that sym
may have something to do with the buggy behavior and needs more information aboutsym to confirm
or dispel the suspicion. It can also use other actions as suitable, e.g., search_code(x\s*=) to
look for assignments to a variable named x, with \s* indicating zero or more whitespaces.
Searching for patterns and anti-patterns Traditional software engineering literature thinks of bugs
as anomalies – patterns of code that are deviant (Engler et al., 2001). It follows that, to diagnose
and understand a bug, one can find frequent patterns in the repository and check if a given piece of
code deviates from it. Code Researcher reasons about which behavior is common or “normal” and
which code snippets look anomalous. It can perform a search_code(regex) action to search
for these patterns and anti-patterns using regular expressions. A classic case is checking a pointer
for null value after allocation. If the agent notices a missing null check for ptr, it can perform
search_code(if\s*\(ptr==NULL\)) to search for null checks throughout the codebase on
ptr. Similarly, it can perform search_code(ptr\s*=.*alloc\(.*\)) to search for all
allocations to ptr to verify whether other parts of the codebase typically perform a null check or not.
Causal analysis over historical commits An interesting and challenging aspect of a codebase
that has been in development for a long time, as many foundational systems codebases have, is
the rich history of commits. Because of continuous development, it is likely that a new bug has
some past commits that can prove helpful in understanding or solving it. Indeed, developers often
reference other commits when they come up with patches. Code Researcher reasons about how
the codebase has evolved and how that evolution is related to the crash report. It can issue a
search_commits(regex) action to search over past commit messages and diffs. For instance,
the regular expression handle->size|crypto_fun\( matches commits that add or remove a
handle->size access, or a call to crypto_fun.
Iterative process of deep research As shown in Figure 1, in each reasoning step, Code Researcher
is asked to decide if it has acquired sufficient context to understand and solve the crash. If yes, it
moves to the next phase of synthesizing the patch (Section 3.2). Initially, the context is empty and it
starts its reasoning process by analyzing the contents of the stack trace and the diagnostic information
provided as input. At each step, the agent evaluates the context accrued so far and decides which
lines of exploration to extend by issuing multiple search actions simultaneously.
3.2 S YNTHESIS AND VALIDATION PHASES
The contents of memory and the reasoning trace of theANALYSIS phase are passed to the SYNTHESIS
phase, along with the crash report. The ANALYSIS phase has the flexibility to follow multiple paths of
inquiry simultaneously. It can thus end up collecting information that does not turn out to be relevant,
which also happens when a human does research on some topic. In large codebases, this irrelevant
information can be quite large and can overwhelm the prompt. Thus, the SYNTHESIS phase first
filters the memory and discards (action, result) pairs that are deemed irrelevant to the task of fixing
the crash. The agent then uses the filtered information to generate a hypothesis about the nature of
the bug and a potential remedy, and the corresponding patch. Finally, in the VALIDATION phase, the
patch is applied to the codebase, and the codebase is compiled. The reproducer program that had
originally caused a crash is run. If the crash is reproduced, the patch is rejected. If not, it is accepted.
5

Preprint
4 E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
Benchmarks We use a thoroughly validated, reproducible subset of 200 instances from the
kBenchSyz benchmark (Mathai et al., 2024) of 279 Linux kernel crashes found by the Syzkaller
fuzzer (Google, 2025b). Each instance in the benchmark consists of (1) a reproducer file, containing
the user-space program that triggers the crash, (2) the ground-truth commit that fixed the bug, and (3)
the crash report at the parent commit of the fix commit (we run all tools at this parent commit). To
show generalizability, we also evaluated Code Researcher on 10 recent crashes of an open-source
multimedia software, FFmpeg (FFmpeg, 2025). More details about the kBenchSyz benchmark and
the FFmpeg dataset are in Appendix G and Appendix D respectively.
Evaluation metrics We compute Pass@k (P@k) defined as P@k = 1, if applying at least one of the
k candidate patches generated by the tool prevents the crash, or P@k = 0 otherwise. We report (1)
Crash Resolution Rate (CRR) which is average P@k, (2) average recall, i.e., the fraction of files
modified in the ground-truth commit (the ground-truth buggy files) in the set of files edited by the
agent, averaged over the k candidate patches, and (3) the percentage of candidate patches where All,
Any or None of the ground-truth buggy files are edited. When a tool does not produce a patch (e.g.,
it runs out of LLM call budget), the set of edited files is assumed to be empty. All the metrics are
averaged over the 200 instances in the benchmark.
Baselines We evaluate Code Researcher in the unassisted setting (i.e., the ground-truth buggy files
that are part of the fix commits are not divulged to the tool) and compare it against the following
baselines: (1) o1 (OpenAI, 2024b) and GPT-4o(OpenAI, 2024a) in the assisted setting, i.e., we give
the ground-truth files that are part of the fix commits and the crash report as input. We prompt the
model to generate a hypothesis about the crash’s cause and a patch. (2) o1 and GPT-4o in the stack
context setting, where we give the contents of the files mentioned in the crash report as input besides
the crash report. (3) SWE-agent 1.0 (Yang et al., 2024), a SOTA coding agent on the SWE-bench
benchmark, in the unassisted setting. For fairness, we add a Linux kernel-specific example trajectory
and background about the kernel to its prompts. We sample k (for Pass@k) SWE-agent trajectories
independently using a temperature of 0.6. (4) Agentless (Xia et al., 2024), another top coding agent
on the SWE-bench benchmark that uses a fixed workflow of localization followed by repair,in the
unassisted setting. We add background about the kernel to its prompts and sample k (for Pass@k)
patches using the same LLM (GPT-4o) as Code Researcher and SWE-agent. (5) CrashFixer (Mathai
et al., 2025), state-of-the-art agent for Linux kernel crash resolution, in the assisted setting, as it
directly uses the ground-truth files to generate patches. If a patch fails to build or crashes with the
ground-truth reproducer, it iteratively refines it using the respective error messages. We report their
results with the Gemini 1.5-Pro-002 model (v. 2024-09-24) and more recent results with the Gemini
2.5-Pro model (v. 2025-06-17).
Implementation, hyperparameters We employ GPT-4o (v. 2024-08-06) for Code Researcher and
for the competing tools. We also experiment with o1 (v. 2024-12-17) in the SYNTHESIS phase
of Code Researcher , and, to show that Code Researcher ’s design is not tied to the OpenAI family
of models, the newer Gemini 2.5-Flash (v. 2025-06-17) for both the ANALYSIS and SYNTHESIS
phases. All our experiments have a context length limit of 50K tokens. In the ANALYSIS phase,
we use a temperature of 0.6 and independently sample k trajectories. For the SYNTHESIS phase,
we sample with increasing temperatures (0, 0.3, 0.6) until the agent produces a correctly-formatted
patch, with a maximum of 3 attempts. We allow all tools a budget of at most max calls LLM calls to
generate a single patch. Please refer to Appendix G for details about the crash reproduction setup,
the prompts, the compute resources and the configurations for Code Researcher and the baselines.
5 E XPERIMENTAL RESULTS
We evaluate Code Researcher across six dimensions. First, we compare its crash resolution ability
against state-of-the-art coding agents and baselines. We then analyze the context gathering capabilities
of different tools by studying (a) whether they are able to find the files that need to be edited, and (b)
the coverage and quality of additional global context gathered. Then, we assess the impact of two
design choices, historical commit analysis and context filtering, on Code Researcher ’s performance.
Finally, we further validateCode Researcher’s crash-resolving patches with unit tests and a qualitative
analysis, and show its generalizability to another codebase.
6

Preprint
Table 1: Crash resolution rate (CRR) for different tools on the kBenchSyz benchmark (200 bugs).
LLMs used by the tools are in parentheses.∗Results are from Mathai et al. (2025), out of 279 bugs.
Setting Tool Max calls P@k CRR (%)
Assisted
GPT-4o 1 P@5 36 .00
o1 1 P@5 51 .00
CrashFixer (Gemini 1.5 Pro-002)∗ ≥ 4 P@16 49 .22∗
CrashFixer (Gemini 2.5 Pro) ≥ 4 P@16 70.00
Stack context GPT-4o 1 P@5 29 .50
o1 1 P@5 40.00
Unassisted
Agentless (GPT-4o) 4 P@5 31 .00
SWE-agent (GPT-4o) 15 P@5 31 .50
Code Researcher (GPT-4o) 15 P@5 48 .00
Code Researcher (GPT-4o + o1) 15 P@5 58 .00
Code Researcher (Gemini 2.5-Flash) 15 P@5 67.00
Unassisted
+ Scaled
SWE-agent (GPT-4o) 30 P@5 32 .00
Code Researcher (GPT-4o) 30 P@5 47 .50
SWE-agent (GPT-4o) 15 P@10 37 .50
Code Researcher (GPT-4o) 15 P@10 54.00
5.1 RQ1: H OW EFFECTIVE ARE DIFFERENT TOOLS AT RESOLVING LINUX KERNEL CRASHES ?
Our main results are presented in Table 1, organized by setting, namely, assisted, stack context,
unassisted, and unassisted + test-time scaled (Section 4).
1) The assisted setting baselines show strong performance, but under unrealistic assumptions.
Given the ground-truth buggy files, LLMs like GPT-4o (CRR of 36%) are quite capable of resolving
crashes. A reasoning model like o1 is significantly better (CRR of 51%). Adding iterative feedback
from the compiler and the crash reproduction setup, CrashFixer achieves 49.22% CRR with an older
Gemini model and 70% CRR with a newer Gemini reasoning model using P@16 with at least 4 max
calls.
2) The stack context setting reveals the difficulty of the practical unassisted setting. The
assumption that an oracle can tell us exactly which files need to be edited is impractical. The gap
between the assisted (idealistic) setting and the practical unassisted setting is highlighted by the simple
but effective stack context setting where models are given the contents of all the files mentioned
in the crash report (truncated to the context length limit). This is a strong baseline because all the
ground-truth buggy files are present in the crash report for 74.50% crashes in our dataset. o1 achieves
a CRR of 40%, which is impressive, but 11% lower than its performance in the assisted setting.
3) Code Researcher consistently outperforms baselines in the unassisted setting. Fixing the LLM
as GPT-4o, Code Researcher achieves a CRR of 48%, significantly outperforming the SWE-agent
and Agentless baselines, both the stack context baselines, and even the assisted GPT-4o baseline.
This indicates that the context gathered by Code Researcher is much more effective than giving file
contents based on the crash report, or using multi-step hierarchical localization (as done by Agentless),
and is even better than directly giving all the contents of the files to be edited. The context gathered
by GPT-4o during ANALYSIS can be better utilized by the reasoning model o1 during SYNTHESIS ,
increasing Code Researcher ’s CRR to 58%. This further increases to 67% using the newer (albeit
not as advanced as Gemini 2.5-Pro) model, Gemini 2.5-Flash, for both phases, indicating that Code
Researcher’s design is not tied to a specific LLM family.
4) Increasing the number of trajectories helps, while making them longer does not. We examine
how scaling the total inference budget (max calls× num trajectories k) impacts the performance of
Code Researcher and SWE-agent. Doubling the max calls budget, i.e., making the trajectories of
the agents longer, has a negligible effect on the CRR, whereas increasing the number of trajectories
sampled improves SWE-agent’s CRR to 37.50% and Code Researcher (GPT-4o)’s CRR to 54.00%.
7

Preprint
Table 2: Average recall and All/Any/None percentages (metrics defined in Section 4) for different
tools. LLMs used by the tools are in parentheses.
Setting Tool Max
calls P@k Avg.
Recall
All/Any/None
(%)
Stack context GPT-4o 1 P@5 0.46 42 .5/7.8/49.7
o1 1 P@5 0 .43 39 .7/7.7/52.6
Unassisted
Agentless (GPT-4o) 4 P@5 0 .49 46 .4/7.7/45.9
SWE-agent (GPT-4o) 15 P@5 0 .37 35 .1/5.6/59.3
Code Researcher (GPT-4o) 15 P@5 0 .51 48 .2/7.8/44.0
Code Researcher (GPT-4o + o1) 15 P@5 0 .53 49 .9/7.6/42.4
Code Researcher (Gemini 2.5-Flash) 15 P@5 0.56 52 .1/9.7/38.2
Unassisted
+ Scaled
SWE-agent (GPT-4o) 30 P@5 0 .40 37 .9/6.4/55.7
Code Researcher (GPT-4o) 30 P@5 0.53 49 .5/8.0/42.5
SWE-agent (GPT-4o) 15 P@10 0 .36 34 .3/5.5/60.2
Code Researcher (GPT-4o) 15 P@10 0 .51 47 .8/7.5/44.7
0 10 20 30 40 50
Unique files opened (clipped at 50)
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Cumulative normalized
count of crashes
SWE-agent
CodeResearcher
SWE-agent Avg: 1.9
CodeResearcher Avg: 29.1
Figure 2: Files explored for each crash (summed over 5 trajectories).
5.2 RQ2: D O THE TOOL -EDITED FILES MATCH THOSE MODIFIED IN DEVELOPER FIXES ?
The information needed by a developer to fix a crash can be divided into (1) the code to be edited and
(2) additional context. We study (1) here by examining whether tools edit the same files as developers,
and study (2) in the next section. Since buggy files are already provided in the assisted setting, we
focus on the stack context and unassisted settings. Full results appear in Table 2.
Code Researcher achieves the highest recall across all baselines, editing all ground-truth buggy
files in nearly half of candidate patches and at least one in another∼ 8%. “Recall” here measures
the fraction of ground-truth files in those edited, not merely explored, making it notable that Code
Researcher edits on average only 1.1 files while exploring 10 (Section 5.3). Agentless attains recall
comparable to Code Researcher and much higher than SWE-agent, but resolves far fewer crashes.
This contrast underscores the importance of the global context gathered by Code Researcher,
beyond just the code being edited. Finally, scaling test-time compute (via increasing max calls or
P@k) for Code Researcher and SWE-agent preserves the overlap between edited and ground-truth
files, and using the newer Gemini 2.5-Flash for Code Researcher further improves its overlap.
5.3 RQ3: H OW EFFECTIVE IS CONTEXT GATHERING FOR RESOLVING KERNEL CRASHES ?
From Tables 1 and 2, Code Researcher (GPT-4o) significantly outperforms baselines that do not
gather additional context but have high recall. This shows that gathering global context (instead of
just localizing the code to edit) can drastically improve kernel crash resolution. Agentless, which does
not gather any context, performs poorly, while SWE-agent does gather context from the codebase,
yet it performs much worse than Code Researcher . Below, we investigate this further:
1) Coverage of the context gathered: Figure 2 shows the distribution of the number of unique files
read across the 5 trajectories by Code Researcher and SWE-Agent (GPT-4o, P@5, 15 max calls).
Code Researcher performs deep research over the codebase, reading 29.13 unique files across 5
8

Preprint
top-level directories on average for each crash. In stark contrast, SWE-agent reads only 1.91 files
on average for each crash. When averaged by trajectory, Code Researcher explores 10 unique files
compared to only 1.33 files explored by SWE-agent.
2) Overlap with developer-referenced context: We use LLM-as-judge to determine the overlap
of the context gathered by Code Researcher (GPT-4o) and SWE-agent with the context mentioned
by the developer in the fix commit message (details in Appendix I). This context overlap is 54.18%
(over candidate patches) for SWE-agent compared to 63.7% for Code Researcher, suggesting that
Code Researcher does a much better job of identifying relevant context that the developer explicitly
relied on when making the fix.
3) Context quality when both edit all the ground-truth modified files: To isolate the impact of the
gathered context, we consider the subset of 90 crashes, where both Code Researcher and SWE-agent
(using the same GPT-4o model) editall the ground-truth files inat least one candidate patchgenerated
by each tool. We can thus attribute their success (or failure) on this subset to the context gathered.
Code Researcher resolves 55/90 = 61 .10% of crashes in this subset, while SWE-agent resolves
only 34/90 = 37 .78% (discounting crash-resolving patches from each tool that do not edit all the
ground-truth files). Taken together, the three observations show that not only doesCode Researcher
gather more context than SWE-agent, it also gathers higher quality context.
5.4 RQ4: H OW IMPORTANT ARE HISTORICAL COMMIT ANALYSIS AND CONTEXT FILTERING ?
Commit history analysis Code Researcher is the first agent to explicitly leverage the rich devel-
opment history of codebases. In this ablation, we run it without the search_commits action
on the set of 96 bugs that were successfully resolved by Code Researcher (GPT-4o, Pass@5, 15
max calls). Table 3 (Appendix A) shows that removing the search_commits action leads to a
10% drop in the crash resolution rate, and decreases the ability to edit the ground-truth modified
files. This highlights that the search_commits action plays a crucial role in context gathering
and localization. Notably, for the example in Appendix H, we also observe that Code Researcher
navigates to the same buggy commit that originally introduced the bug being repaired.
Context filtering As mentioned in Section 3.2, the ANALYSIS phase often gathers large amounts of
irrelevant context, especially in big codebases like the Linux kernel. The SYNTHESIS phase filters
this memory before synthesizing a patch. We provide two pieces of evidence for the importance of
this filtering. First, the average memory length (capped at 50K) across all Code Researcher (GPT-4o,
P@5, 15 max calls) trajectories dropped from 21, 557 tokens to 7, 797 tokens after filtering. Since
irrelevant tokens hurt LLM reasoning, this reduction should help performance. Second, in an ablation
on 20 randomly sampled crashes (10 resolved, 10 unresolved), disabling filtering reduced resolved
crashes from 10 to 8, average recall from 0.41 to 0.35, and All/Any/None from 34.0/16.0/50.0 to
29.0/15.0/56.0. This shows the importance of filtering in Code Researcher ’s performance.
5.5 RQ5: H OW ROBUST ARE Code Researcher ’S PATCHES ?
Kernel unit tests In addition to extensive testing (for 10 minutes on 4 machines with 8 parallel
processes) for crash-resolution per the kBenchSyz setup, we run kernel unit tests to check if the pro-
posed patches break existing functionality. For each of the 116 crashes resolved by Code Researcher
(GPT-4o+o1, P@5, 15 max calls), we selected one crash-resolving patch and ran KUnit (Linux, 2025)
tests on it. For a total of 28 crashes, either KUnit was not present in the kernel source code version on
which the crash was reported or it did not support the required setup. For the remaining 88 crashes,
all the KUnit tests had a status of either PASS or SKIP (some hardware-specific tests are skipped
depending on the machine requirements). On average, only∼ 13 tests were skipped for a patch while
∼ 210 tests were passed with no unit test failures reported.
Qualitative analysis While perusing the crash-resolving patches, we came across the following
types of patches. Examples for each category (with explanations) are in Listings 1-4, Appendix J.
(1) Accurate patches correctly identify and fix the root cause of the crash, closely resembling
the developer solution. (2) Overspecialized patches successfully prevent the crash but may be
overspecialized. (3) Incomplete patches correctly identify the problem area and approach, but may
not be complete. They provide debugging insights and could accelerate the path to a proper fix. (4)
Inaccurate patches offer a plausible way to resolve the crash, but differ from the developer fix.
9

Preprint
5.6 RQ6: D OES Code Researcher GENERALIZE TO OTHER SYSTEMS CODEBASES ?
To demonstrate thatCode Researcher generalizes with a little effort to other codebases, we experiment
with crash resolution in the FFmpeg (FFmpeg, 2025) codebase, a leading open-source multimedia
framework. We build a small dataset of 10 recent security-related crash vulnerabilities (which
are assigned the top priority) reported by OSS-Fuzz (Google), an automated fuzzing service for
open-source projects. Full details of the codebase, dataset construction, and reproduction steps are
given in Appendix D. We run Code Researcher with the same core prompts as for the Linux kernel.
In the unassisted setting ( ANALYSIS with GPT-4o, SYNTHESIS with o1, max calls = 15), Code
Researcher resolves 7 of 10 crashes at Pass@1. It achieves an average recall of 0.78, editing all
the ground-truth files in 7 crashes and none in 2 (excluding one case without a known fix). While
FFmpeg crashes are typically not as complex as Linux kernel crashes, our results show that Code
Researcher’s techniques generalize easily and effectively to other systems codebases.
6 C ONCLUSIONS , LIMITATIONS , AND FUTURE WORK
In this work, we extend coding agents to deep research scenarios arising in resolving complex issues
in large systems codebases. We (a) leverage the rich development history in the codebases (commits),
and (b) design effective deep exploration strategies for gathering the rich context often needed to
root-cause and patch code crashes. We establish state-of-the-art results on the latest and challenging
benchmark of Linux kernel crashes, thoroughly validate our results, perform ablations, and show
the generalizability of our approach. Our work currently targets the crash resolution problem, but
there are other equally important problems faced by systems software such as slow response times,
excessive resource usage and flakiness. It remains to be seen if our deep research strategy could be
applied to these scenarios. Deep research for code is a new subfield of agentic AI and we intend to
explore novel usecases and strategies beyond the ones presented in the paper.
