record_id: arxiv:2604.13559
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.13559
fetched_title: WebMAC: A Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework for Scenario Testing of Web Systems Tester Test scenarios Test scripts Scenario testing (with LLM) Test results
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:25Z

WebMAC: A Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework for Scenario
Testing of Web Systems
Zhenyu Wana,∗, Gong Chena,∗, Qing Huangb and Xiaoyuan Xiea,∗∗
aSchool of Computer Science, Wuhan University, China
bSchool of Computer and Information Engineering, Jiangxi Normal University, China
ARTICLE INFO
Keywords:
Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework
Scenario Testing
Web System
ABSTRACT
Scenario testing is an important technique for detecting errors in web systems. Testers draft test
scenarios and convert them into test scripts for execution. Early methods relied on testers to convert
test scenarios into test scripts. Recent LLM-based scenario testing methods can generate test scripts
from natural language descriptions of test scenarios. However, these methods are not only limited
by the incompleteness of descriptions but also overlook test adequacy criteria, making it difficult
to detect potential errors. To address these limitations, this paper proposes WebMAC, a multi-
agent collaborative framework for scenario testing of web systems. WebMAC can complete natural
language descriptions of test scenarios through interactive clarification and transform adequate
instantiated test scenarios via equivalence class partitioning. WebMAC consists of three multi-agent
modules, responsible respectively for completing natural language descriptions of test scenarios,
transformingtestscenarios,andconvertingtestscripts.WeevaluatedWebMAConfourwebsystems.
Compared with the SOTA method, WebMAC improves the execution success rate of generated test
scripts by 30%–60%, increases testing efficiency by 29%, and reduces token consumption by 47.6%.
Furthermore, WebMAC can effectively detect more errors in web systems.
1. Introduction
Web systems play an important role in modern digital
services. They support user interactions, business-process
execution, and data presentation, providing a flexible and
efficient operating environment for a wide range of appli-
cations (Amalfitano, Fasolino and Tramontana, 2011; Mir-
shokraie, Mesbah and Pattabiraman, 2014; Moran, Linares-
Vásquez,Bernal-Cárdenas,VendomeandPoshyvanyk,2017).
Scenario testing is an important technique for detecting
errors in web systems (Dalal and Mallows, 1998; Chan-
dorkar,Patkar,DiSorboandNierstrasz,2022;Irshad,Britto
and Petersen, 2021; Zampetti, Di Sorbo, Visaggio, Canfora
andDiPenta,2020).Testersdrafttestscenariosandconvert
them into test scripts for execution. Fig. 1 shows the techni-
cal evolution of scenario testing. Before the advent of large
language models (LLMs), early methods relied on testers to
converttestscenariosintotestscripts,whichlimitedthelevel
of automation in scenario testing.
In recent years, LLMs have demonstrated remarkable
capabilities in understanding natural language and gener-
ating code. Researchers have introduced LLMs into sce-
nario testing to automatically convert test scenarios into
executable test scripts. Testers only need to design test sce-
nariosdescribedinnaturallanguage,andthenprovidethese
descriptions as prompts to the LLM to generate executable
testscripts(Chen,Zhang,Nguyen,Zan,Lin,LouandChen,
2022;Huang,Zhang,Luck,Bu,QingandCui,2023a;Shinn,
Cassano, Gopinath, Narasimhan and Yao, 2023). Although
LLM-basedscenariotestingmethodshavefurtherimproved
∗Co-first authors.
∗ ∗Corresponding author.
wan_zy@whu.edu.cn(Z. Wan);chengongcg@whu.edu.cn(G. Chen);
qh@whu.edu.cn(Q. Huang);xxie@whu.edu.cn(X. Xie)
Tester
Tester
Test
scenario
Test script
Web system
Test
scenario
Test script
Web system
Manual
scenario testing
Automated
scenario testing
(without LLM)
Automated
scenario testing
(with LLM)
Tester
Tester
Test
scenario
Web system
Tester
Test scenarios
Test scripts
Test scenarios
Test scripts
Scenario testing
(without LLM)
Scenario testing
(with LLM)
Tester
Test results
Test results
Figure 1:The technical evolution of scenario testing
theautomationofscenariotesting,theystillfacetwomajor
limitations.
First, incomplete natural language descriptions of
testscenariosleadLLMstogenerateincorrecttestscripts.
Testers often focus on key test fields while neglecting other
necessary ones. For example, as shown in Fig. 2(a), the add
owner page requires all necessary fields to be filled before
submission.Whenincompletenaturallanguagedescriptions
of test scenarios are used as prompts for LLMs, missing
any of these fields will lead the LLMs to generate incorrect
test scripts. These test scripts will fail to execute due
to missing required fields. Existing LLM-based scenario
testing methods attempt to infer and supplement missing
informationbasedonthefeedbackfromexecution.However,
these methods are inefficient, token-intensive, and often
generate test scripts that do not meet the intended testing
objectives(Bergsmann,Schmidt,FischerandRamler,2024;
Liu,Chen,Wang,Che,Huang,HuandWang,2023;Li,Cui,
Huang, Towey and Ma, 2024; Yu, Ling, Fang, Zhou, Chen,
Zhu and Chen, 2025).
Secondly, in the process of converting test scenarios
into corresponding test scripts, existing methods over-
look test adequacy criteria (e.g., combinatorial coverage
First Author et al.:Preprint submitted to ElsevierPage 1 of 13
arXiv:2604.13559v1 [cs.SE] 15 Apr 2026

criteria).For example, as shown in Figure 2(b), they gen-
erate asingletest script from an instantiated test scenario,
which limits their ability to detect potential errors in the
web system. An intuitive approach is to leverage LLMs to
modify parameters and corresponding test oracles in initial
instantiated test scenarios, thereby generating adequate in-
stantiated scenarios and corresponding test scripts to detect
more errors in web systems. However, this approach faces
a key challenge: LLMs struggle to correctly understand the
semantic relationship between modified parameters and test
oracles, making it difficult to generate correct test scripts.
To address the two limitations mentioned above, we
propose WebMAC, a multi-agent collaborative framework
for scenario testing of web systems. WebMAC consists of
three multi-agent modules: a clarification module, a trans-
formation module, and a testing module. Specifically, the
clarification module completes natural language descrip-
tions of test scenarios through interactive clarification, the
transformation module produces adequate instantiated test
scenarios through equivalence class partitioning, and the
testing module automatically generates and executes test
scripts.
First, to address the issue of LLMs generating in-
correct test scripts due to incomplete natural language
descriptions of test scenarios, we design a clarification
module.This module completes natural language descrip-
tionsoftestscenariosthroughcollaborationamongmultiple
intelligentagentsandinteractiveclarificationwiththetester.
Specifically, the clarification module retrieves information
from the system under test (such as forms, components,
etc.) and analyzes it in conjunction with the test scenario
description to identify missing information. Then it gener-
ates clarification questions based on the identified missing
information and asks the testers to clarify the missing in-
formation. After receiving the tester’s answers, the module
automatically integrates the interaction context to complete
natural language descriptions of test scenarios. We also de-
signedatestingmodulecapableofconvertingtestscenarios
into executable test scripts, automatically executing them,
and outputting test reports.
Secondly, to address the issue that existing methods
overlook test adequacy criteria, we added a transforma-
tion module between the clarification module and the
testing module.This module generates adequate instanti-
ated test scenarios through multi-agent collaboration and
equivalence class partitioning. Specifically, it first extracts
concrete parameter values from the initial instantiated test
scenario and replaces them with placeholders to construct
a parameterized scenario template. For each extracted pa-
rameter, the module queries an external knowledge base to
retrieveitscorrespondingequivalenceclasspartitions.Then,
the module automatically generates different equivalence
classes based on the retrieved equivalence class partitions.
These equivalence classes are combined and then used to
instantiate the scenario template. The module then updates
the test oracle according to the selected combinations of
equivalence classes, thereby generating adequate instanti-
ated test scenarios.
We conducted experiments on four open-source web
systems to evaluate the performance of WebMAC. The
results show that WebMAC consistently outperforms the
baseline across multiple metrics. WebMAC can efficiently
and effectively detect errors in web systems. Specifically,
WebMAC reduces the average testing time by 29% and
LLM token consumption by 47.6%, while requiring fewer
interactions. Meanwhile, the generated test scripts achieve
a higher execution success rate. Furthermore, by generating
adequateinstantiatedtestscenariosandconvertingtheminto
test scripts, WebMAC detects more errors in web systems.
In summary, the contributions of this work are as follows:
•We complete natural language descriptions of test
scenarios through multi-agent collaboration and in-
teractive clarification, addressing incorrect test script
generation caused by incomplete descriptions of test
scenarios.
•We introduce combinatorial coverage criteria into
the LLM-based scenario testing method, generating
adequateinstantiatedtestscenariosandcorresponding
test scripts through multi-agent collaboration and
equivalence class partitioning.
•Experimental results show the effectiveness of Web-
MAC in detecting errors of web systems. We release
WebMAC including the code and experimental data
online at Artifact-Link.
2. Background and Motivation
Software testing is a crucial practice to ensure the
correctness, reliability, and security of software systems.
Among various testing paradigms, scenario testing offers
unique value in validating systems that involve rich user
interactions or real-world operational conditions. Scenario
testingusesscenariosthatdescribetheinteractionsbetween
users,components,orexternalsystemsinspecificsituations
to design and execute test cases that reflect actual usage
patterns.
In recent years, LLMs, represented by GPT-3.5 and
its subsequent models, have demonstrated powerful capa-
bilities, offering unprecedented opportunities to automate
and enhance software engineering tasks, including software
testing (Wang, Yang, Wang, Huang, Chu, Song, Zhang,
Chen and Ma, 2024b; Yuan, Liu, Ding, Wang, Chen, Peng
and Lou, 2024). In scenario testing, LLMs are regarded
as natural tools for interpreting and understanding scenario
descriptions provided by developers, domain experts, or re-
quirementdocuments,owingtotheirstrongnaturallanguage
comprehension and generation abilities (Arora, Herda and
Homm, 2024; Wang, Huang, Chen, Liu, Wang and Wang,
2024a).ResearchershaveactivelyexploredtheuseofLLMs
to generate test scripts from test scenarios. By supplying
LLM with a test scenario described in natural language, the
model can generate a corresponding executable test script.
First Author et al.:Preprint submitted to ElsevierPage 2 of 13

Feature: add owner
Given this is the current URL:
"http://localhost:8080/owners/new"
When I add a person with first name "Tom" and last name
"Smith" as a new pet owner
Then the owner "Tom Smith" should be created in the system
Target web system
(with five required fields)
Natural language description of test scenario
(only two required fields)
Prompt:
<Natural language description of test scenario>
Transform the above scenarios into the test scripts.
```python
...code...
page.goto("http://localhost:8080/owners/new")
# Fill the input field
page.fill("#firstName", "Tom")
page.fill("#lastName", "Smith")
# Click the "Find Owner" button
page.click("button[type='submit']")
```
Execution result:
Address is null
City is null
Telephone is null
LLM
Target web System
Prompt:
<Completed natural language description of test
scenario>
Transform the above scenarios into the test scripts.
```python
...code...
page.fill("#firstName", "Tom")
page.fill("#lastName", "Smith")
page.fill("#address", "412 Main Street")
page.fill("#city", "NewYork")
page.fill("#telephone", "6095916230")
```
Execution result:
The owner added successfully
LLM
Target web System
Feature: add owner
Given this is the current URL:
"http://localhost:8080/owners/new"
When I add a person with first name "Tom", las
t name "Smith", address "412 Main Street" with
city "NewYork" and telephone "6095916230" as a
new pet owner
Then the owner "Tom Smith" should be created in
the system
```python
...code...
page.goto("http://localhost:8080/owners/new")
# Fill the input field
page.fill("#firstName", "Tom")
page.fill("#lastName", "Smith")
page.fill("#address", "412 Main Street")
page.fill("#city", "New York")
page.fill("#telephone", "6095916230")
```
LLM
SOTA method
(a) The incomplete natural language description of the test scenario leads to
incorrect test script generation by the LLM (b) The SOTA method overlooks test adequacy criteria
Initial instantiated test scenario
Test script
Transformed instantiated test scenarios
Test scripts
...
When I add a person with
first name "Jean-Luc",
last name "O'Connor", ...
Then the owner "Jean-
Luc O'Connor" should be
created in the system
...
page.fill("#firstName",
"Jean-Luc")
page.fill("#lastName",
"O'Connor")
...
WebMACSOTA method
firstName
Valid equivalence class partitioning:
Including - (hyphen, used in compound names), ...
Invalid equivalence class partitioning:
Including special symbols (@, #, $), ...
lastName
Valid equivalence class partitioning:
Including '(apostrophe, commonly seen in Irish
surnames), ...
Invalid equivalence class partitioning:
Including special symbols (@, #, $), ...
firstName
Valid equivalence classes:
Jean-Luc, ...
Invalid equivalence classes:
Tom@, ...
lastName
Valid equivalence classes:
O'Connor, ...
Invalid equivalence classes:
Smith@, ...
LLM
Equivalence classes combination (All valid):
Jean-Luc, O'Connor; ...
Equivalence classes combination (with invalid):
Jean-Luc, Smith@; Tom@ O'Connor; ...
PICT
WebMAC
LLM
The owner added successfully
The test result is consistent with the test expectation,
and no errors is detected
Execution result
The owner added successfully
The test result is not
consistent with the
expected outcome, and
an error is detected
Execution results
Test report
Test reports
...
When I add a person with
first name "Jean-Luc",
last name "Smith@", ...
Then the owner "Jean-
Luc Smith@" should not
be created in the system
...
When I add a person with
first name "Tom@",
last name "O'Connor", ...
Then the owner "Tom@
O'Connor" should not be
created in the system
...
...
page.fill("#firstName",
"Jean-Luc")
page.fill("#lastName",
"Smith@")
...
...
page.fill("#firstName",
"Tom@")
page.fill("#lastName",
"O'Connor")
...
The test result is
consistent with the
test expectation, and
no errors is detected
The owner added failed The owner added successfully
The test result is
consistent with the
test expectation, and
no errors is detected
...
...
...
Human：Address is "412 Main Street", city is
"NewYork", and telephone is "6095916230"
<Natural language description of test scenario>
+
① ② ③
LLM LLM LLM
<Completed natural language description of
test scenario>
Figure 2:Motivation Example. (a) Illustrates how the incomplete natural language description of the test scenario leads to
incorrect test script generation by the LLM. The natural language description of the test scenario is used as input, and the LLM
converts it into a corresponding test script, which is then used to test the target web system. (b) Demonstrates how the SOTA
method overlooks test adequacy criteria when converting instantiated test scenarios into test scripts. Although there are five
different fields in the initial instantiated test scenario, we selected two (fast name and last name) as examples due to image size
limitations.
Thisparadigmhasthepotentialtoimprovetestingefficiency
and reduce the effort required to convert test scenarios into
executable test scripts.
A recent study explored the use of LLMs to conduct
scenario testing on web systems (Bergsmann et al., 2024).
TheydescribedtestscenariosintheGherkinformat,astruc-
turednaturallanguageusedtospecifybusinessrequirements
in behavior-driven development. These scenarios were then
usedtoconstructpromptsfortheLLM,whichgeneratedcor-
responding test scripts. This work demonstrates that LLMs
are capable of automating the conversion from test scenar-
ios to test scripts. However,when faced with incomplete
natural language descriptions of test scenarios, their
method generates incorrect test scripts. For example, as
shown in Fig. 2(a), the target web system provides a form
containing five fields, includinglast name,first name,city,
address, andtelephone, while the test scenario describes
an “add owner” case but mentions only thelast nameand
firstname.WhentheSOTAmethodusesincompletenatural
language descriptions of test scenarios to construct prompts
for the LLM. Consequently, the generated test script only
requireslast nameandfirst namefields to be entered into
the target web system. After executing the test script, the
target web system provides an execution result indicating
that the content is missing. Even if they use the execution
result to repair the test script, it is difficult to generate a
correct test script, which wastes time and tokens. WebMAC
uses human answers to complete the description of the test
scenarioandthenusesthisdescriptiontoconstructaprompt,
which is subsequently input into the LLM. This enables the
LLMtocorrectlygenerateatestscriptwiththefiverequired
fields,therebyensuringthesuccessfulsubmissionofthetest
script and improving the testing efficiency while reducing
token consumption. Therefore, completing natural language
descriptionsoftestscenariosbeforegeneratingthetestscript
is crucial.
Furthermore,duringtheconversationoftestscenarios
intotestscripts,existingmethodsoverlooktestadequacy
criteria.For example, as shown in Fig. 2(b), the SOTA
method can convert instantiated test scenarios into corre-
sponding test scripts. However, this test script can only
cover one parameter combination (e.g.,first name“Tom”,
last name“Smith”,address“412 Main Street”,city“New
York”, andtelephone“6095916230”). It cannot cover other
equivalence classes, such as empty fields, illegal characters,
format errors, or boundary values. This makes it difficult to
detectpotentialerrorsinthewebsystem.WebMACadheres
to test adequacy criteria, using equivalence class partition-
ing to modify the parameters in the initial instantiated test
scenariostotheircorrespondingequivalenceclasses.Forex-
ample, it transforms “Tom” into the valid equivalence class
“Jean-Luc”,ortheinvalidequivalenceclass“Tom@”.Then,
itcombinesequivalenceclasseswithdifferentparametersto
generateinstantiatedtestscenarios,thuscoveringcasessuch
as illegal characters. It also updates the test oracle to ensure
thecorrectnessofscenarios.Forexample,inscenario③de-
pictedintheFig.2(b),thescenariocontainsthecombination
“Tom@ O’Connor”, which includes an invalid equivalence
class. Accordingly, WebMAC modifies the test oracle to
“Then the owner “Tom@ O’Connor” should not be created
inthesystem”.WebMACthenconvertsthesescenariosinto
test scripts and executes them, detecting potential errors by
comparing the execution results against the test oracle. In
scenario③,theexecutionresultwas“Theowneraddedsuc-
cessfully”. However, since “Tom@” constitutes an invalid
equivalence class for the first name, the addition should not
First Author et al.:Preprint submitted to ElsevierPage 3 of 13

Tester
Knowledge
base
Equivalence
class partitions
Equivalence
classes
Combinations of
equivalence classes
PICT
Script for
getting
information
HTML
information
Complete
description
of scenario
Incomplete
description
of scenario
Clarification
question
Answer
Complete
description
of scenario
Coder
Equivalence
class generator
Coder
Executor
Test oracle
generator
Executor
Analyst
Clarifier
Analyst
Rewriter
Summarizer
Test
script
Test
result
Test
report
Clarification Module
Transformation Module Testing Module
Instantiated
test
scenario
JSON
string
New instantiated
test scenarios
Figure 3:Overview of WebMAC
have succeeded. As the execution result did not align with
thetestoracle,anerrorwasdetected.Thisdemonstratesthat
adheringtotestadequacycriteriacandetectpotentialerrors.
In this paper, we crawl and filter the HTML information
from the target web system to analyze the completeness of
the scenario description by examining the parameters they
specify. When the description of the test scenario is com-
plete, no clarification is required. For the incomplete sce-
nario description, we analyze missing information and pose
targeted clarification questions to the tester. The description
is then completed by incorporating the tester’s answer. To
satisfytestadequacycriteriaduringtestscriptgeneration,we
modifytheparametersintheinstantiatedtestscenariousing
equivalence class partitioning. Furthermore, we update the
test oracle based on combinations of equivalence classes,
thereby generating adequate instantiated test scenarios. Ul-
timately, the LLM converts them into test scripts to detect
errors in web systems.
3. Approach
To address the limitations of incomplete natural lan-
guage descriptions of test scenarios and the existing meth-
ods that overlook test sufficiency criteria, this paper pro-
poses WebMAC, a multi-agent collaborative framework for
scenario testing of web systems. WebMAC can complete
natural language descriptions of test scenarios, generate
adequate instantiated test scenarios, and convert them into
corresponding test scripts. The approach consists of three
modules: the clarification module, the transformation mod-
ule, and the testing module. The overview of WebMAC is
shown in Fig. 3.
First, the tester provides an instantiated test scenario
described in Gherkin format. In the clarification module,
the Coder writes a script to crawl web forms based on the
URLofthetargetwebinthedescriptionofthetestscenario,
and the Executor runs the script to obtain the HTML infor-
mation. Then, the Analyst analyzes whether the description
of the test scenario is complete based on the parameters
contained in the test scenario and the HTML information
in the web system. If the description of the test scenario
is complete, proceed to the next module. If the description
of the test scenario is incomplete, the Clarifier generates
clarificationquestionsforthetesterandthenincorporatesthe
tester’sanswerstocompletethedescription.Finally,aJSON
string is generated based on the historical records, which
containscontextualinformationaboutthetestscenario(Sec-
tion 3.1). We use this JSON string in the transformation
module. In the transformation module, the system retrieves
the equivalence class partitions of parameters in the test
scenario from an external knowledge base. Leveraging the
retrieved partitions, the module prompts LLMs to generate
different equivalence classes for the corresponding parame-
ters. To ensure adequate instantiated test scenarios, we use
the pairwise independent combinatorial testing tool (PICT)
to combine equivalence classes of different parameters into
varied combinations. Then, based on the combinations of
equivalenceclasses,thetestoracleisadjustedaccordinglyto
generate adequate instantiated test scenarios (Section 3.2).
In the testing module, once it receives an instantiated test
scenario,themodulegeneratesthecorrespondingtestscript,
executesitagainstthewebsystem,andoutputsthetestreport
(Section 3.3).
3.1. Clarification Module
The clarification module aims to improve the execution
success rate of generated test scripts by leveraging human-
computerinteractionandmulti-agentcollaborationtogener-
atefullyspecifiedtestscenarios.Inthispaper,testscenarios
are presented in Gherkin form. These scenarios contain a
wealthoftestinginformation,includingtheURLoftheweb
system under test, the test behaviors, and the test oracle.
Using these test scenarios as input prompts, the LLM can
generate corresponding test scripts.
If the natural language descriptions of the test scenario
iscomplete,thentheLLMcanconvertthetestscenariointo
the corresponding test script and execute it correctly. How-
ever, if the description of the test scenario lacks necessary
form information from the target web system, the test script
generatedbyLLMsmayfailtosatisfythetestoracledefined
in the scenario. For example, consider a test scenario where
a user successfully registers. The target webpage contains
First Author et al.:Preprint submitted to ElsevierPage 4 of 13

Coder
Tester
Executor
Analyst
Clarify
Rewriter
Summarizer
Tester
Feature: add owner
Given this is the current URL: "http://localhost:8080/owners/new"
When I add a person with first name "Tom" and last name "Smith" as a
new pet owner
Then the owner "Tom Smith" should be created in the system
```python
...<code>...
page.goto("http://localhost:8080/owners/new")
Retrieve the HTML elements of the corresponding URL
...<code>...
Code output:
<html>...HTML elements...</html>
Exitcode: 0
Interaction_Elements: - Input Field, - Add Owner Button, ...
Webpage_Information: This is a web page for adding owner ......
IsClarify: 1
What do you need to add for the user's address, city and telephone?
The address is 412 Main Street, the city is NewYork, and the telephone is
6095916230.
Feature: add owner
Given this is the current URL: "http://localhost:8080/owners/new"
When I add a person with first name "Tom" and last name "Smith", add
ress "412 Main Street" with city "NewYork" and telephone "6095916230"
as a new pet owner
Then the owner "Tom Smith" should be created in the system
{"scenario": "Feature: add owner ......",
"parameter_list": ["first name", "last name", "address", "city",
"telephone"],
"is_effective": True,
"scenario_template": "Feature: add owner ......"}
Clarification Process
Figure 4:Clarification Process in WebMAC
three form fields: a username field, a password field, and
a telephone field. However, the test scenario only mentions
the correct username and the correct password, missing the
crucialtelephonefield.Asaresult,theLLMmaygeneratea
test script that leads to registration failure, violating the test
oracle. If the correct telephone information were specified
in the scenario beforehand, the test script generated by the
LLM would successfully execute the registration process,
thus satisfying the test oracle.
To complete the natural language description of the test
scenario, the module can analyze the missing information
in the test scenario by obtaining information from the web
system, and then raise clarification questions to the testers
regarding the missing information, thereby refining the test
scenario. The missing information in the descriptions of the
testscenariotypicallycorrespondstointeractiveelementson
the web system. However, the full web system information
contains substantial noise, which may hinder the LLM’s
ability to analyze the test scenario and generate accurate
clarification questions. To address this issue, we use regular
expressions to filter the full web system information and
retain only the interactive elements, thereby reducing noise.
Specifically,wedesignamulti-agentsystemastheclari-
ficationmodule.Intheclarificationmodule,webreakdown
the clarification process into a series of collaborative and
verifiable subtasks, and introduce six agents to assist testers
in clarifying test scenarios: Coder, Executor, Analyst, Clar-
ifier, Rewriter, and Summarizer. These agents will collabo-
rate to obtain information about the web system under test
and help testers clarify descriptions of test scenarios. The
functions of each agent are as follows:
•Coderwrites a script that can crawl the HTML infor-
mationofthetargetwebsystembasedonthedescrip-
tion of the test scenario.
•Executorautomatically executes the script returned
by Coder and reports the execution results.
•Analystanalyzes the execution results, especially the
component information and form information of the
target web system.
•Clarifieraskstestersclarifyingquestionsbasedonthe
analysis results, combined with the description of the
test scenario.
•Rewritercompletes the description of the test sce-
nario based on the tester’s answer.
•Summarizersummarizesthechathistoryandreturns
contextual information such as the complete descrip-
tion of the test scenario, parameters in the scenario,
scenario template, and other information in JSON
string format.
Fig. 4 shows a specific clarification process. First, the
tester uses the Gherkin language to write the initial instanti-
ated test scenario and input it into the clarification module.
TheFeaturein the test scenario can be regarded as the
scenario overview, theGivenstatement can be regarded as
the target web system to be tested, theWhenstatement can
be regarded as the test input, and theThenstatement can be
regardedasthetestoracle.Accordingtothebuilt-inprocess
oftheclarificationmodule,theCoderwillbecalledtowrite
the script to obtain the HTML information of the target
web system. In this example, the URL of the target web
system is “http://localhost:8080/owners/new”. Accordingly,
the script generated by the Coder is designed to retrieve
the HTML information associated with this URL. Once the
Coder completes the script, it is passed to the Executor,
whichexecutesthescripttoobtaintheHTMLinformationof
thewebsystem.Throughthiscollaboration,themodulecol-
lects the web system information that supports subsequent
clarification steps.
However, the full HTML information often contains a
lot of noise, which can hinder the agents’ analysis of the
target web system. To address this issue, we apply regular
expressions to filter the complete web system information
and retain only the interactive elements, thereby reducing
noise. The filtered HTML information is then passed to
the Analyst for further analysis. The Analyst will analyze
fouraspects:scriptexecution(whetheritrunssuccessfully),
web system functional components, web system descrip-
tion, and whether the test scenario needs to be clarified.
In Fig. 4, the Analyst gives its analysis results, “Exitcode:
First Author et al.:Preprint submitted to ElsevierPage 5 of 13

0” indicates that the script is executed successfully, web
system component information “Interaction_Elements: ...”,
web system information “Webpage_information: This is a
webpageforaddingowner......”,and“IsClarify:1”indicates
that the scenario needs to be clarified. When “IsClarify: 1”
is reported in the analysis result, the Clarifier will combine
the chat history to ask clarification questions for the test
scenario. TheWhenstatement in the initial instantiated
test scenario only contains the first name and last name
fields, while the webpage contains five form components,
namelyfirst name,last name,address,city, andtelephone.
Therefore, the Clarifier asks a clarification question for the
components not mentioned in the test scenario, “What do
youneedtoaddfortheuser’saddress,city,andtelephone?”.
This clarification question will be sent to the tester and
awaitstheiranswer.Inresponsetotheclarificationquestion,
the tester gives the answer “The address is 412 Main Street,
the city is NewYork, and the telephone is 6095916230.”.
Finally, the Rewriter completes the initial instantiated test
scenario in combination with the answer of the tester. In
addition, in order for the transformation module to work
smoothly,wealsodesignedanintelligentagentSummarizer
to summarize the chat history of the clarification module,
and summarize information such as “scenario”, “parame-
ter_list”, “is_effective”, and “scenario_template” from the
chat history. They are collected into a JSON string as the
input of the transformation module.
3.2. Transformation Module
Thepurposeoftransformingtestscenariosistogenerate
more adequate instantiated test scenarios based on the com-
plete description of the test scenario output by the clarifica-
tionmoduletodetectmoreerrorsinwebsystems.Ingeneral,
theparameterscontainedinatestscenariocorrespondtothe
formfieldsofthetargetwebsystemundertest.Therefore,we
first analyze the JSON string produced by the clarification
module.ThisJSONstringincludestheparametersidentified
in the test scenario, as well as a scenario template in which
these parameters are replaced with placeholders.
For each parameter, we query an external knowledge
base to retrieve the corresponding equivalence class parti-
tions.Theparametersandtheirassociatedequivalenceclass
partitionsarethenprovidedtotheLLMasprompts,enabling
the LLM to generate a wide range of candidate equivalence
classes. To further enhance the diversity of the generated
instantiated test scenarios, we combine these equivalence
classes across different parameters and fill each resulting
combination into the scenario template, thereby creating
adequate instantiated test scenarios. Since a test scenario
also contains test oracles, inserting a combination of equiv-
alence classes into the scenario requires that the test oracle
be updated accordingly. Therefore, we can adjust the test
oracleaccordinglybasedonthecombinationofequivalence
classes,therebyachievingthetransformationofinstantiated
test scenarios.
Database
Equivalence
class generator
Test oracle
generator
PICT
Clarification
moudle
{"scenario": "Feature: add owner
Given this is the current URL: "http://localhost:8080/owners/new"
When I add a person with first name "Tom" and last name "Smith", address
"412 Main Street" with city "NewYork" and telephone "6095916230" as a new
pet owner
Then the owner "Tom Smith" should be created in the system",
"parameter_list": ["first name", "last name", "address", "city", "telephone"],
"is_effective": True,
"scenario_template": "Feature: add owner
Given this is the current URL: "http://localhost:8080/owners/new"
When I add a person with first name "<first name>" and last name "<last
name>" as a new pet owner with address "<address>" with city "<city>" and
telephone "<telephone>"
Then the owner "<first name> <last name>" should be created in the system"}
variable: first name
valid equivalence class: ["Letter + space/hyphen/apostrophe", "For
characters 1 to 50, try to take boundary values as much as possible", ...]
invalid equivalence class: ["Including numbers", "null value", ...]
first name: John12, John@, ...
last name: Smith34, Smith#, ...
address: MainStreet, M@in Street, ...
city: NewYork123, NewYork$, ...
telephone: 609591623, 60959162301, ...
first name,last name,address,city,telephone
John12,Smith#,MainStreet,NewYork$, 609591623
John@,Smith34,M@in Street,NewYork123,60959162301
......
The metamorphic of invalid equivalence classes:
Feature: add owner
Given this is the current URL: "...:8080/owners/new"
When I add a person with first name "John12" and last name "Smith34"
as a new pet owner with address "MainStreet" with city "NewYork" and
telephone "609591623"
Then the owner "John12 Smith#" should be created in the system
......
The metamorphic of invalid equivalence classes:
Feature: add owner
Given this is the current URL: "...:8080/owners/new"
When I add a person with first name "John@" and last name "Smith#" as
a new pet owner with address "MainStreet" with city "NewYork" and
telephone "609591623"
Then the owner "John12 Smith#" should not be created in the system
......
Transformation Process
Figure 5:Transformation Process in WebMAC
To effectively transform test scenarios, we design a
multi-agentsystemasthetransformationmodule.Thismod-
ule consists of a retrieval tool, a PICT tool, and two agents:
the Equivalence Class Generator and the Test Oracle Gen-
erator. These agents leverage the contextual information
provided by the clarification module to retrieve equivalence
classpartitions,generateequivalenceclasses,andtransform
test scenarios, thereby producing adequate instantiated test
scenarios. The functions of the two agents are as follows:
•Equivalence class generatorcan generate equiva-
lence classes for corresponding parameters according
to the equivalence class partitions.
•Test oracle generatorcan adjust the test oracle ac-
cordingly based on the combination of equivalence
classes.
Fig. 5 shows a specific transformation process. The
JSON string generated by the clarification module is pro-
vided as input to the transformation module. Based on
Featureof the instantiated test scenario, the transformation
module retrieves equivalence class partitions from an ex-
ternal knowledge base. This knowledge base stores a large
collectionofscenarios,parameters,andtheircorresponding
equivalenceclasspartitions.Toobtaintheequivalenceclass
First Author et al.:Preprint submitted to ElsevierPage 6 of 13

partitions corresponding to parameters, the module first
retrieves the relevant scenario. For example, ifFeatureof
the instantiated test scenario is “add owner”, it searches the
knowledge base for scenarios associated with the keyword
“add owner”. It then retrieves the equivalence class parti-
tions of the parameters listed in “parameter_list” from that
scenario. For instance, the parameterfirst namemay have
validpartitionssuchas“Letter+space/hyphen/apostrophe”
and “For characters 1 to 50, try to take boundary values as
much as possible”, and invalid partitions such as “Including
numbers” and “null value”.
After organizing these partitions, the module constructs
a prompt that pairs each parameter with its corresponding
equivalence class partitions and sends it to the Equivalence
Class Generator. This agent then produces concrete equiv-
alence classes according to the retrieved equivalence class
partitions. For example, for the parameterfirst name, if one
partitionspecifies“Includingspecialsymbols(@,#,$)”,the
generatedequivalenceclassmaybe“John@”.Toexpandthe
number of generated test scenarios, we use the PICT tool
to create pairwise combinations of all equivalence classes,
thereby producing a large set of combinations. However,
these combinations merely modified the parameters of the
testinputswithintheinstantiatedtestscenarios,whereasthe
content of the test oracles remained unchanged. To address
this issue, we employ the Test oracle generator, which re-
vises the test oracle accordingly based on the combination
of equivalence classes. If all equivalence classes filled into
thescenariotemplatearevalid,theoracleissettoapositive
outcome.Otherwise,theoracleismodifiedtoreflectanega-
tiveoutcome.Throughthisprocess,themodulecangenerate
adequate instantiated test scenarios.
3.3. Testing Module
In order to convert test scenarios into corresponding
test scripts and execute the test scripts, we design a multi-
agent system as the testing module. This module consists
of three agents: Coder, Executor, and Analyst, which work
collaboratively to perform automated testing and return the
corresponding test reports. The functions of these three
agents are as follows:
•Coderconvertsthetestscenariointothetestscriptfor
the target web system.
•Executorautomatically runs the test script produced
by the Coder and returns the execution results.
•Analystanalyzestheexecutionresults,generatesboth
the test outcome and the corresponding test report.
Fig. 6 shows a specific testing process. We iteratively
feedtheinstantiatedtestscenariosoutputbythetransforma-
tion module into the testing module. For instance, based on
the descriptions contained in a test scenario: “When I add
a person with first name ‘John12’ and last name ‘Smith#’
as a new pet owner with address ‘MainStreet’ with city
‘NewYork$’ and telephone ‘609591623”’, the agent Coder
writes the test script to submit the owner information for
Coder
Executor
Analyst
Clarification
moudle
Feature: add owner
Given this is the current URL: "http://localhost:8080/owners/new"
When I add a person with first name "John12" and last name "Smith
#" as a new pet owner with address "MainStreet" with city "NewYork$
" and telephone "609591623"
Then the owner "John12 Smith#" should not be created in the system
```python
from playwright.sync_api import sync_playwright
with sync_playwright() as playwright:
browser = playwright.chromium.launch(headless=False) # headless=False
page = browser.new_page()
page.goto("http://localhost:8080/owners/new")
# Fill the input field
page.fill("#firstName", "John12")
page.fill("#lastName", "Smith#")
page.fill("#address", "MainStreet")
page.fill("#city", "NewYork$")
page.fill("#telephone", "609591623")
# Click the "Find Owner" button
page.click("button[type='submit']")
# Print the current url's html code
print(page.content())
# Print the current url itself
print(page.url)
```
Code output:
<html>...HTML elements...</html>
Test_Information: After executing the code, the web page was successfully
submitted and conformed to the description of the test scenario ......
IsPass: 1
Testing Process
Figure 6:Testing Process in WebMAC
theURL“http://localhost:8080/owners/new”.Thetestscript
is automatically executed by the Executor and returns the
executionresults.Finally,theAnalystanalyzestheexecution
resultsandreportsthetestexecutionstatus,thuscompleting
thetest.Forinstance,“IsPass:1”meansthetestpassed,and
“Test_Information”containsthetestreport“Afterexecuting
the code, the web page was successfully submitted and
conformed to the description of the test scenario ......”.
4. Experiments Setup
This section presents the research design of this study,
including the research questions, baseline methods, target
web systems, and experimental environment.
4.1. Research Questions
To evaluate WebMAC, we conducted experiments to
investigate the following three research questions:
•RQ1: How does WebMAC compare to the SOTA
method on test script execution success rate?
•RQ2: How efficient is the testing of WebMAC?
•RQ3: How effective is WebMAC in detecting errors
in the web system?
4.2. Baseline
To evaluate WebMAC, we adopted the SOTA LLM-
based scenario testing method proposed by Bergsmann et
al. (Bergsmann et al., 2024) as our baseline. This method
First Author et al.:Preprint submitted to ElsevierPage 7 of 13

proposesamulti-agentsystembasedonAutoGenthatusesa
Collaborator agent to schedule different agents and provide
high-levelguidanceforthetestingprocess.Thesystemtakes
thenaturallanguagedescriptionofthetestscenarioasinput.
Under the coordination of the Collaborator agent, multiple
intelligent agents collaboratively analyze the scenario, gen-
erate an executable test script through iterative information
exchange, and automatically execute the test script to com-
pletethetest(capableofperformingactionssuchasclicking
and inputting in the web system).
In RQ1 and RQ2, since the SOTA method does not in-
clude the capability to transform instantiated test scenarios,
we compare them with a version of WebMAC where the
transformation module is removed. This allowed us to eval-
uate the execution success rate of the test scripts generated
by WebMAC, as well as WebMAC’s testing efficiency.
4.3. Web Systems
We selected the Petclinic1 web system in (Bergsmann
et al., 2024) as the system under test. To evaluate the ap-
plicability of our approach across different web systems,
we used keywords such as “Java web” and “HTML” to
search for web systems on GitHub and cloned 14 projects.
After excluding web systems that could not run properly
in our experimental environment, we finally selected three
additionalwebsystemswithdifferentfunctionalities(Blog 2,
Tour-reservation3, and Tracw4) for our experiments.
PetClinicisapethospitalsystemthatallowsuserstoadd,
searchfor,andaccesspetsandtheirowners.Blogisasystem
for creating and browsing blogs. Tour-reservation is a travel
ticketing system. Tracw is a wallet system that allows users
to set up deposit and withdrawal limits.
4.4. Experiment Environment
All experiments were conducted on an HP worksta-
tion (Precision 3660) equipped with a 12th Gen Intel(R)
Core(TM) i7-12700 processor and 16GB of RAM. The
Google Chrome version used was 140.0.7339.128 (Official
Build) (arm64), and the Chrome web driver version was
140.0.7339.185 (r1496484).
5. Experiments Results
5.1. How does WebMAC compare to the SOTA
method on test script execution success rate?
The execution success rate of the test scripts generated
by WebMAC and the SOTA method on four different web
systems is presented in the form of a bar chart in Fig. 7. It
canbeseenthattheexecutionsuccessrateofthetestscripts
generated by our method on the four different web systems
is stronger than that of the SOTA method. Specifically,
both WebMAC and the SOTA method perform well when
descriptions of test scenarios are complete, but WebMAC
1https://github.com/spring-projects/spring-petclinic
2https://github.com/mangeshpawar830/spring-boot-blog-master
3https://github.com/muhammadumarrasheed/tour-reservation
4https://github.com/NithinBairoju/tracw
Figure 7:The execution success rate of test scripts generated
by WebMAC and the SOTA method on four different web
systems
performs significantly better than the SOTA method when
handling incomplete descriptions of test scenarios.
When handling incomplete descriptions of test scenar-
ios, the SOTA method often generates incorrect test scripts,
which leads to test script submission failures. Although
the SOTA method can regenerate test scripts by incorpo-
rating system feedback, it typically requires multiple iter-
ations before a correct script is generated. As the num-
ber and complexity of form fields in the web system in-
crease, the number of iterations required for incomplete
natural language descriptions of test scenarios also grows.
These repeated iterations accumulate extensive interaction
history filled with noise, making it more likely for the
LLM to generate test scripts that deviate from the tester’s
intent, ultimately causing test failures. For example, con-
sider the “add owner” test scenario for the web system
Petclinic: “Feature: Add owner; Given this is the current
URL: http://localhost:8080/owners/new; When I add a per-
son with first name ‘John’ and last name ‘Smith’ as a new
petowner;Thentheowner‘JohnSmith’shouldbecreatedin
the system”. The scenario lacks concrete values foraddress,
city, andtelephonefields, causing the LLM to generate a
test script based solely on the incomplete natural language
descriptions of test scenarios and then rely on the web sys-
tem’s feedback to infer which fields are missing. However,
the web system’s feedback typically provides only general
error messages, such as “address is null”, without offering
anyfurtherguidanceonthemissingcontent.Thisoftenleads
theLLMtogeneratearbitraryplaceholdervalueslike“<ad-
dress>”.Incontrast,WebMACintroduceshuman-computer
interaction to provide concrete values at critical moments.
WebMAC identifies the missing contents in the description
of the test scenario and asks clarification questions to the
tester. The tester’s responses supply the specific missing
content,andtheLLMthenusestheseresponsestocomplete
the description of the test scenario. This process also avoids
the accumulation of noisy history during iteration, which
could affect the completion of the scenario description.
Additionally, we found that the SOTA method performs
particularlypoorlywhenthetestscenarioisnegative.When
First Author et al.:Preprint submitted to ElsevierPage 8 of 13

Table 1
The effectiveness and efficiency of WebMAC and the SOTA method on four different web systems
Web System Approach Execution Success Rate Avg. Clar.
Time (s)
Avg. Test
Time (s)
Avg. Clar.
Tokens
Avg. Test
Tokens
Avg. Interactions
During Clarification
Avg. Interactions
During Test
Petclinic Bergsmann et al. 71.43% 0 42.45 0 19867.94 0 14.27
WebMAC100% 24.26 12.71 7261.82 4592.17 7.23 4
Blog Bergsmann et al. 69.20% 0 43.05 0 19717.08 0 14.85
WebMAC100% 23.72 8.44 4677.92 4590.38 7.75 4
Tour-
reservation
Bergsmann et al. 40% 0 36.78 0 18757.67 0 13.47
WebMAC100% 17.48 8.69 5038.07 5292.53 6.4 4
Tracw Bergsmann et al. 42.86% 0 52.41 0 25473.48 0 13.38
WebMAC100% 20.60 8.17 6672.19 5781.71 7.14 4
the input test scenario describes a case in which submit-
ting invalid input should cause the web system to reject
the submission, the SOTA method still initiates automatic
iterativerefinement.Itrepeatedlyadjuststhetestscriptbased
on the web system’s feedback and may even insert values
into the test script that contradict the original test sce-
nario. This is because the workflow designed by the SOTA
method focuses on accomplishing actions rather than exe-
cuting the scenario itself, which weakens the role of test
oracles embedded in test scenarios. For example, consider
the “register account” test scenario for the web system
Tracw, “Feature: Register account; Given this is the cur-
rentURL:http://localhost:8080/register;WhenIenteredthe
Username ‘abc’, the Password ‘123456@Mm’, Telephone
‘123456789’, Initial Balance ‘10’, and then clicked ‘Reg-
ister’; Then register failed”. In this test scenario, the test
should fail because the input telephone is invalid. However,
the SOTA method instructs the LLM to achieve the goal of
completing account registration. As a result, after receiving
feedback from the webpage indicating that the telephone is
invalid, the LLM proactively modifies the illegal telephone
into a valid one to ensure successful registration. This vio-
lates the test oracle specified in the test scenario.
In four different web systems, the execution success rate
ofthetestscriptsgeneratedbyWebMACissignificantly
higherthan the SOTA method, which proves that Web-
MAC can effectively improve the execution success rate
of the generated test scripts.
5.2. How efficient is the testing of WebMAC?
As shown in Table 1, WebMAC achieves shorter test-
ing time than the SOTA method across four different web
systems. In terms of token consumption, WebMAC also
usessignificantlyfewertokens.Atthesametime,WebMAC
requires fewer interactions with the LLM compared to the
SOTA method.
In terms of testing time, the clarified test scenarios
already have all missing information filled in, allowing the
system to generate correct test scripts without iterative re-
finement.Thisenablesthetestingprocesstocompletemuch
more quickly. Comparing the performance of the two ap-
proaches across different web systems, WebMAC reduces
theaveragetesttimeby75%comparedtotheSOTAmethod.
In Petclinic, because the web system contains relatively few
formfields,thetestscenariosinvolvefewerparameters.This
allows the SOTA method to complete automated testing
more quickly. WebMAC reduces the average test time by
70% compared to the SOTA method. In contrast, in Tracw,
the web system contains many more form fields, and the
corresponding scenarios involve more parameters. As a re-
sult, the SOTA method requires significantly more time to
complete automated testing for these descriptions of test
scenarios,causingWebMACtoreducetheaveragetesttime
by 84% compared to the SOTA method. This indicates that
the more complex the forms of the web system are, the
greater the advantage of WebMAC becomes. Of course,
WebMAC requires a clarification process. However, even
afterincludingthetimespentonclarification,WebMACstill
reduces the average testing time by 29% compared to the
SOTA method.
In terms of token consumption, once the test scenario
has been clarified, all missing information has already been
completed.Therefore,noiterativerepairisneeded,prevent-
ing excessive token usage. Across different web systems,
WebMAC reduces the average number of test tokens by
76% compared to the SOTA method. In Tour-reservation,
because the web system is simple and contains less HTML
information, the Executor produces fewer tokens. As a re-
sult, the SOTA method consumes fewer tokens in this web
system.WebMACreducestheaveragenumberoftesttokens
by 71% compared to the SOTA method. In contrast, in
Tracw, the web system is more complex and contains a
larger amount of HTML information, leading the Executor
to output more tokens. This further amplifies the advantage
of WebMAC in token consumption, causing WebMAC to
reduce the average number of test tokens by 77% compared
to the SOTA method. Similarly, WebMAC also consumes
sometokensduringtheclarificationprocess.However,even
after including the tokens used in clarification, WebMAC
still consumes 47.6% fewer test tokens compared to the
SOTA method.
Intermsofinteractioncount,WebMAC,becauseituses
test scenarios with already completed content, can directly
generate correct test scripts without a large number of inter-
actions.Incontrast,theSOTAmethodrequiresiterativegen-
erationoftestscriptsandisaffectedbynoiseinthehistorical
First Author et al.:Preprint submitted to ElsevierPage 9 of 13

Table 2
The errors detected in different web systems
Web System Approach
The number of
transformation
scenarios
The number of
discovered
errors
Types of
errors
discovered
Petclinic Bergsmann et al. 1 0 0
WebMAC119 26 14
Blog Bergsmann et al. 1 0 0
WebMAC93 21 13
Tour-
reservation
Bergsmann et al. 1 0 0
WebMAC84 19 11
Tracw Bergsmann et al. 1 0 0
WebMAC78 16 11
records generated during iteration, requiring more interac-
tionstogeneratecorrecttestscripts.Intermsofperformance
across different web systems, the SOTA method requires
approximately 3.5 times more user interactions on average
than WebMAC. When generating test scripts, the SOTA
methodmustfirstproduceaninitialtestscriptandthenrefine
it based on the feedback of the web system. Depending on
the complexity of the test scenario, the SOTA method may
require two to three rounds of iteration before obtaining a
correct test script. In contrast, WebMAC first clarifies the
incompletenaturallanguagedescriptionofthetestscenario,
allowing WebMAC to generate the test script without any
iteration, resulting in a stable interaction count of four.
Although WebMAC performs completeness checking and
clarification, even after including the interactions involved
in the clarification stage, WebMAC still maintains a clear
advantage over the SOTA method in terms of interaction
count.
WebMACoutperformstheSOTAmethodintestingtime,
token consumption, and interaction count with the LLM
across four different web systems, demonstrating that
WebMAC can effectively reduce testing costs and im-
prove testing efficiency.
5.3. How effective is WebMAC in detecting errors
in the web system?
In this experiment, we evaluate the ability of WebMAC
todetecterrorsacrossfourdifferentwebsystems.Asshown
inTable2,startingfromanincompleteinstantiatedtestsce-
nario, WebMAC can clarify and transform it into hundreds
of distinct instantiated test scenarios. These transformed
scenarios are able to uncover multiple errors, and the types
of errors detected vary across systems. This demonstrates
that our approach can effectively detect errors in the web
systems. In contrast, Bergsmann et al.’s method overlooks
test adequacy criteria and generates only a single test script
based on the initial test scenario, which fails to effectively
expand the test coverage and therefore fails to detect errors
in all four systems.
Specifically, in Petclinic, after the description of the test
scenario is clarified and transformed by WebMAC, a total
of 119 different instantiated test scenarios are generated.
For example, in a test scenario describing adding an owner
successfully, the form of the target web system contains
first name,last name,address,city, andtelephone. A single
instantiatedtestscenariocanonlydetectthesituationwhere
all offirst name,last name,address,city, andtelephoneare
valid. After transformation, however, the 119 test scenarios
include cases such as: (1) an invalidfirst namewith valid
last name,address,city, andtelephone; and (2) an invalid
lastnamewithvalidfirstname,address,city,andtelephone,
amongothers.Thesetestscenarioscoveralltheequivalence
class partitions in the external knowledge base, thereby
revealing26errors,including14distincttypesoferrors.For
instance, for the invalid equivalence class “the first name
must not contain @”, the corresponding equivalence-class
value “John@” surprisingly passes the test, revealing that
thetargetwebsystemignorestheillegal-characterrestriction
onfirstname.Anotherexampleisthevalidequivalenceclass
fortelephone,“areacodesmaybeconnectedwithhyphens”,
where the valid value “609-591-6230” fails to successfully
add an owner and produces an error report, revealing that
the target web system does not support this correct tele-
phone format. Experiments on Blog, Tour-reservation, and
Tracwsimilarlygenerateadequateinstantiatedtestscenarios
throughthistransformationprocess,coveringvariouspossi-
ble cases of the target web systems, thereby detecting errors
in web systems.
WebMAC was evaluated on four different web systems,
where it was able to generate adequate instantiated test
scenarios and detect errors in the target web systems,
demonstratingtheeffectivenessofWebMACindetecting
errors.
6. Discussion
Therearepotentialthreatstothevalidityofourapproach.
Additionally,wediscussedtheimpactofcombiningequiva-
lence classes on scenario coverage.
6.1. Threats to Internal Validity
A potential threat to internal validity stems from Web-
MAC’s reliance on OpenAI’s third-party API services for
test scenario clarification, transformation, and script gener-
ation. Network latency or instability during API calls could
introducevariabilityinexecutiontimeorevencauserequest
failures, thereby affecting the reproducibility and consis-
tency of the experimental results. To mitigate this issue,
weselectedhigher-speednetworkequipmentandconducted
experimentsduringperiodsofstablenetworkconditions.To
minimizethisconfoundingfactor,allexperimentswerecon-
ducted in a controlled network environment with dedicated
bandwidth and during off-peak hours to ensure stable con-
nectivity. Nevertheless, residual variability due to external
API dependencies remains a limitation. Another threat to
internal validity lies in the assumption that test oracles can
be systematically derived from equivalence class partitions.
In practice, for a small subset of test scenarios, especially
those involving complex state transitions or dependencies
First Author et al.:Preprint submitted to ElsevierPage 10 of 13

on external services, it is difficult to derive the expected
behavior based on equivalence classes. This may lead to
incorrect oracles, potentially compromising the execution
success rate of the test script.
6.2. Threats to External Validity
With respect to external validity, some target web sys-
tems may trigger behaviors that lead to non-HTML pages,
fromwhichrelevantpageinformationcannotbedirectlyob-
tained. This limits the applicability of our approach in such
scenarios. However, our approach can be readily adapted
to such systems by updating the example template used by
the Coder. Moreover, the equivalence class partitions are
manually defined for each web system, which may hinder
the portability of our approach across diverse application
domains.Futureworkshouldinvestigateautomatedmethods
for deriving equivalence class partitions, thereby reducing
manual effort and improving cross-domain adaptability.
6.3. Impact of Combining Equivalence Classes
Ourapproachgeneratesdiversetestscriptsbycombining
equivalence classes. Effective combination of equivalence
classesiscrucialtoimprovebothtestingefficiencyanderror
detection effectiveness. In this work, we employ the classic
combinatorial testing tool PICT to generate combinations
of equivalence classes. However, while PICT produces a
large number of combinations of equivalence classes, not
allinstantiatedtestscenarioscorrespondingtocombinations
cantriggererrors,whichaffectstheefficiencyoferrordetec-
tiontosomeextent.Consequently,apromisingdirectionfor
future research is to implement a rigorous filtering process
forthesecombinationsofequivalenceclassestomitigatethis
issue.
7. Related Work
This section introduces some related work, including
LLM-based scenario testing, the multi-agent collaborative
framework, and equivalence class partitioning.
7.1. LLM-based Scenario Testing
The application of LLMs in software testing has seen
significant advancements in recent years, particularly in
scenario testing (Liu et al., 2023; Li et al., 2024; Yu et al.,
2025). Current research primarily uses the natural language
understanding and code generation capabilities of LLMs to
translate test scenarios into test scripts directly (Li, Xiong,
Li, Yang and Pan, 2023a; Yang, Yang, Gao, Wang, Wang,
Zhu, Chu, Zhou, Liang, Wang et al., 2024; Korraprolu,
Pinninti and Reddy, 2025). For example, TestGPT-Server
(Wang,Chen,Liu,Deng,Zhang,FuandLiu,2025)employs
an LLM-enhanced interface analyzer and code analyzer to
extractAPIsyntaxandsemantics,andthengeneratesdiverse
test requests through a targeted request generator and a
guided random tester. An LLM-assisted response analyzer
further identifies service crashes and detects errors through
automated assertion mining. In GUI testing, GUIPilot (Liu,
Teoh, Lin, Chen, Ren, Poshyvanyk and Dong, 2025) lever-
ages LLMs for automated exploration, but its test oracle
relies on manually provided mockup designs, hindering the
automatic construction of accurate verification conditions.
Similarly, GPTDroid (Liu, Chen, Wang, Chen, Wu, Che,
Wang and Wang, 2024) formulates mobile GUI testing as
a question-answering task, using LLMs to generate test
scripts. Although these approaches improve the level of
automation in scenario testing, they often lead LLMs to
generate incorrect test scripts when confronted with incom-
plete natural language descriptions of test scenarios. The
WebMAC framework proposed in this paper mitigates this
limitation by using a multi-agent collaborative framework
to assist testers in completing natural language descriptions
of test scenarios and enabling the generation of correct test
scripts(Huang,Wan,Xing,Wang,Chen,XuandLu,2023b).
7.2. Multi-Agent Collaborative Framework
As research on LLMs deepens, single agents are no
longer sufficient for many tasks. Consequently, research has
shiftedtothemulti-agentcollaborativeframework(Li,Ham-
moud, Itani, Khizbullin and Ghanem, 2023b; Wu, Bansal,
Zhang, Wu, Li, Zhu, Jiang, Zhang, Zhang, Liu et al., 2024).
These frameworks are being used in various research fields
and have demonstrated excellent performance (Guo, Chen,
Wang, Chang, Pei, Chawla, Wiest and Zhang, 2024; Qian,
Xie, Wang, Liu, Zhu, Xia, Dang, Du, Chen, Yang et al.,
2024; Yan, Zhou, Zhang, Zhang, Zhou, Miao, Li, Li and
Zhang, 2025). Through task decomposition and role divi-
sion, multi-agent systems enable different agents to focus
onspecificsubtasks(Bo,Zhang,Dai,Feng,Wang,Li,Chen
and Wen, 2024; Zhu, Dastani and Wang, 2024). Agents can
share knowledge and context through interaction and col-
laboration, imbuing the system with collective intelligence,
achievinggreaterefficiencyandrobustnessincomplextasks.
In scenario testing, multi-agent collaborative frameworks
coordinate complex tasks and improve testing efficiency
through division of labor and collaboration. For example,
Bergsmannetal.(Bergsmannetal.,2024)useaCollaborator
agent that coordinates multiple agents and provides high-
levelguidanceforgeneratingandexecutingGherkintestsce-
narios. However, scenario testing often involves ambiguous
or incomplete inputs. In such cases, relying on a centralized
agenttoorchestratetheentireworkflowispronetoerrors,as
itmaymisinterprettheseambiguitiesandgenerateincorrect
test scripts. To address this limitation, WebMAC proposes
a multi-agent collaboration framework for scenario testing.
Rather than relying solely on agents to interpret incomplete
natural language descriptions of test scenarios, WebMAC
integrates human-computer interaction to resolve ambigu-
ities, thereby preventing erroneous assumptions that could
lead to invalid test scripts. This significantly enhances the
efficiency of scenario testing and the execution success rate
of the generated test scripts.
7.3. Equivalence Class Partitioning
Equivalence class partitioning divides the input domain
into disjoint subsets that are behaviorally equivalent to the
First Author et al.:Preprint submitted to ElsevierPage 11 of 13

system under test (Bhat and Quadri, 2015; Hübner, Huang
andPeleska,2019).Byselectingarepresentativeinputfrom
each subset, testers can avoid redundant test cases while
maintaining coverage, thereby improving testing efficiency.
Inpractice,equivalenceclasspartitioningiscommonlycom-
binedwithboundaryvalueanalysis,valid/invalidinputclas-
sification, and combinatorial interaction coverage strategies
toimproveerrordetectioneffectivenessunderlimitedtesting
budgets (Radcliffe et al., 1991; Fields and Verhave, 1987;
Fields, Adams and Verhave, 1993). WebMAC’s transfor-
mation module extracts parameters from instantiated test
scenarios and automatically derives equivalence classes for
each parameter. WebMAC then combines the equivalence
classesofdifferentparametersusingPICT(Microsoft,2024)
to generate a large number of combinations of equivalence
classes.Finally,foreachcombinationofequivalenceclasses,
WebMAC synthesizes an appropriate test oracle and gener-
ates a corresponding instantiated test scenario.
8. Conclusion
In this paper, we propose WebMAC, a multi-agent col-
laborative framework for scenario testing of web systems.
Through interactive clarification and multi-agent collabo-
ration, WebMAC mitigates the problem of generating in-
correct test scripts due to incomplete natural language de-
scriptions of test scenarios in LLM-based scenario testing.
Furthermore, it adheres to test adequacy criteria, leveraging
multi-agentcollaborationandequivalenceclasspartitioning
tocorrectlygenerateadequateinstantiatedtestscenariosand
corresponding test scripts, thereby detecting more errors
in web systems. Experiments across multiple web systems
demonstrate that WebMAC significantly improves both the
executionsuccessrateandtheefficiencyoftestscriptgener-
ation,whileeffectivelydetectingerrors.Thisworkadvances
automated scenario testing and promotes deeper integration
of LLMs into software engineering practices. Future work
will further study the scale issues that may arise in the
processofequivalenceclasscombination,exploremoreeffi-
cientfilteringandselectionstrategies,andextendWebMAC
to more complex and diverse software test scenarios.
9. Declaration of competing interest
The authors declare that they have no known competing
financial interests or personal relationships that could have
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
10. Acknowledgments
This work was partially supported by the National Key
R&D Plan of China (Grant No.2024YFF0908003), and the
Natural Science Foundation of China (No.62472326).
