record_id: arxiv:2506.05010
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2506.05010
fetched_title: ComfyUI-Copilot: An Intelligent Assistant for Automated Workflow Development
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:01:12Z

arXiv:2506.05010v1 [cs.CL] 5 Jun 2025
ComfyUI-Copilot: An Intelligent Assistant for Automated Workflow
Development
Zhenran Xu1,2*, Xue Yang1†, Yiyu Wang1, Qingli Hu1, Zijiao Wu1,
Longyue Wang1, Weihua Luo1, Kaifu Zhang1, Baotian Hu2†, Min Zhang2
1Alibaba International Digital Commerce 2Harbin Institute of Technology (Shenzhen)
{xuzhenran.xzr,shali.yx,menshuan.wyy,qingli.hql,zijiao.wzj}@alibaba-inc.com
{wanglongyue.wly,weihua.luowh,kaifu.zkf}@alibaba-inc.com
{hubaotian,zhangmin2021}@hit.edu.cn
/gtbhttps://github.com/AIDC-AI/ComfyUI-Copilot
Abstract
We introduce ComfyUI-Copilot, a large lan-
guage model-powered plugin designed to en-
hance the usability and efficiency of Com-
fyUI, an open-source platform for AI-driven
art creation. Despite its flexibility and user-
friendly interface, ComfyUI can present chal-
lenges to newcomers, including limited docu-
mentation, model misconfigurations, and the
complexity of workflow design. ComfyUI-
Copilot addresses these challenges by offering
intelligent node and model recommendations,
along with automated one-click workflow con-
struction. At its core, the system employs a
hierarchical multi-agent framework compris-
ing a central assistant agent for task delega-
tion and specialized worker agents for differ-
ent usages, supported by our curated ComfyUI
knowledge bases to streamline debugging and
deployment. We validate the effectiveness of
ComfyUI-Copilot through both offline quan-
titative evaluations and online user feedback,
showing that it accurately recommends nodes
and accelerates workflow development. Ad-
ditionally, use cases illustrate that ComfyUI-
Copilot lowers entry barriers for beginners and
enhances workflow efficiency for experienced
users. The ComfyUI-Copilot installation pack-
age and a demo video are available at https:
//github.com/AIDC-AI/ComfyUI-Copilot.
1 Introduction
Recent advancements in large language models
(LLMs) and image generation methods have de-
mocratized AI-generated content (AIGC) produc-
tion, with open-source frameworks like Com-
fyUI (comfyanonymous, 2023) emerging as piv-
otal tools for low-code AI workflow development.
Serving over 4 million active users and backed by
a vibrant community contributing 12K+ compo-
*Work done during internship at Alibaba International
Digital Commerce.
†Corresponding authors.
nents (e.g., SDXL (Podell et al., 2023), Control-
Net (Zhang et al., 2023)), ComfyUI enables flexible
workflow orchestration via drag-and-drop compo-
nents for multimodal tasks such as text-to-image
generation, face swapping, and video editing.
Despite its convenience, newcomers may face
several potential barriers when starting with Com-
fyUI. These challenges include the installation of
dependent nodes and models, scattered documen-
tation across forums and GitHub issues. Even ex-
perienced users require substantial expertise to de-
bug and construct a well-designed workflow (Gal
et al., 2024). Recent research on automatic work-
flow construction has limitations, such as instability
(i.e., generating unprocessable workflows) and a
narrow focus primarily on text-to-image genera-
tion tasks (Xue et al., 2024; Sobania et al., 2024).
Addressing these challenges and facilitating the on-
boarding process for ComfyUI is therefore crucial.
To this end, we introduce ComfyUI-Copilot,
an LLM-empowered multi-agent framework de-
signed to assist users in navigating ComfyUI. It
provides the following key features: (1) Automatic
workflow generation: Our copilot can identify
user intent, retrieve or synthesize an appropriate
workflow, and then integrate it into the ComfyUI
canvas. An example of its functionality is shown in
Figure 1. (2) Node and model recommendation:
Our copilot can suggest suitable nodes based on
user instructions, recommend relevant checkpoints
and LoRA models. (3) ComfyUI-related question
answering: Our copilot provides detailed tutori-
als on selected nodes and models, including usage
guidelines, installation steps, and parameter expla-
nations. It can also offer multiple feasible down-
stream subgraphs for selected nodes. Addition-
ally, we introduce new features aimed at enhancing
workflow debugging and optimization, including
prompt writing and parameter search.
The framework of ComfyUI-Copilot is centered
around an LLM-based assistant agent, which co-
1

(a) ComfyUI Workflow Generation (b) One-click Deployment
Figure 1: An example of automated workflow generation in ComfyUI-Copilot: the copilot suggests multiple
workflows based on the user instruction and loads the selected one into the canvas with a single click.
ordinates with various specialized worker agents
and knowledge bases (KBs). Depending on the
query, the assistant agent may address user queries
directly or delegate tasks to appropriate worker
agents. We have developed three primary worker
agents focused on workflow generation, node and
model recommendation. To support these agents,
we have constructed extensive KBs covering 7K
nodes, 62K models, and 9K workflows. These KBs
are enhanced through automated documentation
generation by leveraging LLM’s code comprehen-
sion capabilities, and are continuously expanded
and updated daily. Unlike prior work (Gal et al.,
2024; Sobania et al., 2024) which only targets text-
to-image generation, the resources in our KBs ex-
tend to conditional multimodal generation tasks, en-
suring that our system accommodates both diverse
tasks and cutting-edge modules with accuracy.
Experiments show that ComfyUI-Copilot pro-
vides accurate assistance in node recommendation
and workflow construction based on user instruc-
tions. The high recall rates for workflows and
nodes (both exceeding 88.5%) validate the prac-
tical efficacy in automated workflow development
and accurate node recommendation. Since its re-
lease on GitHub, online user feedback reflects a
moderately high acceptance rate of 65.4% for rec-
ommended nodes and a notably high acceptance
rate of 85.9% for proposed workflows. Use cases
further highlight the system’s capability to reduce
entry barriers for beginners and enhance workflow
efficiency for experienced ComfyUI users with
multilingual support.
To the best of our knowledge, ComfyUI-Copilot
is the first open-source project to develop a Com-
fyUI plugin for automating workflow creation and
providing instant suggestions. As of the camera-
ready date (May 29, 2025), it has already attracted a
rapidly growing user base, accumulating over 1.6K
GitHub stars and processing more than 85K queries
from 19K users across 22 countries. In future work,
we plan to incorporate feedback from the active
open-source community and continuously update
features to better address user needs.
2 Related Work
AI-generated content (AIGC) based on Com-
fyUI. Diffusion models have gained wide atten-
tion in AI research for image synthesis (Ho et al.,
2020; Dhariwal and Nichol, 2021). As the field
of text-to-image generation progresses, new tasks
and models (Kumari et al., 2023; Ruiz et al., 2023;
Li et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023) have been pro-
posed to introduce controllable conditions in im-
age generation. Therefore, researchers and practi-
tioners are transitioning from simple text-to-image
workflows to more sophisticated ones, where the
open-source ComfyUI (comfyanonymous, 2023)
offers great convenience. In ComfyUI, users can
easily construct workflows by connecting a series
of blocks, each representing specific models or pa-
rameter choices. Each ComfyUI workflow can be
exported to a JSON file which outlines both the
graph nodes and their connectivity.
Instead of relying on an end-to-end diffusion
model for image generation, advanced workflows
combine a variety of components to enhance image
quality (Guo et al., 2024; Ye et al., 2023). These
2

Type your message …
ComfyUI Interface
Canvas Copilot Plugin
ComfyUI-Copilot Server
System Prompt
User
Instruction
Short-
Term
Memory
Collaboration
N Y
Worker Agents
Driven by DeepSeek-V3 GPT-4o
User
Workflows
Models
Nodes
Knowledge
Base
ComfyUI-Copilot Knowledge Base
Assistant
Agent
Workflow
Generation
Node
Recommendation
Model
Recommendation
Prompt Writing
Parameter Search
Parameters
Figure 2: Overview of the ComfyUI-Copilot framework : The central LLM-based assistant agent can either
respond directly to user instructions based on the conversation history (i.e., short-term memory), or collaborate with
specialized worker agents. These agents are supported by our curated ComfyUI knowledge bases.
components may include fine-tuned versions of
generative models, large language models (LLMs)
for refining input prompts, LoRAs trained to in-
troduce specific artistic styles, improved latent de-
coders for finer details, super-resolution blocks,
and more (Hu et al., 2021; Mañas et al., 2024;
Berrada et al., 2025; Ning et al., 2021). Importantly,
effective workflows are prompt-dependent, with the
selection of models and nodes often based on the
user intent and the desired image content (Gal et al.,
2024). Therefore, creating a well-designed work-
flow and selecting appropriate nodes and models
require significant expertise, where our ComfyUI-
Copilot comes into help.
LLM-based agents. Recent advancements in
LLMs have demonstrated great improvements in
reasoning abilities and adaptability to new content
and tasks (Chen et al., 2024b; Zeng et al., 2024;
Wang et al., 2025). Based on these emergent capa-
bilities (Wei et al., 2022), various studies have uti-
lized LLMs for agentic task completion using exter-
nal tools, including hallucination detection (Cheng
et al., 2024b), visual question answering (Cheng
et al., 2024a; Yin et al., 2024), and web naviga-
tion (Agashe et al., 2025; Yang et al., 2025; Li et al.,
2025). In addition to tools, LLM-based agents are
often equipped with components such as memory
mechanisms (Wang et al., 2024; Xu et al., 2025), re-
trieval modules (Asai et al., 2024; Kim et al., 2024)
and reasoning strategies like self-reflection (Shinn
et al., 2023; Xu et al., 2023), aimed at enhancing
their overall performance.
Our work proposes a multi-agent framework
for the automated development and deployment of
ComfyUI workflows. In this framework, the LLM
acts as the central planner, autonomously select-
ing suitable worker agents to address diverse user
queries. Although recent research has shown in-
creasing interest in workflow generation (Gal et al.,
2024; Xue et al., 2024; Sobania et al., 2024), ex-
isting methods often face challenges such as in-
stability, leading to unparseable output workflows,
or are limited to text-to-image tasks. We broaden
the scope to include various conditional image and
video generation tasks, and address user queries
with a high acceptance rate.
3 ComfyUI-Copilot
In this section, we provide a detailed description of
ComfyUI-Copilot. As illustrated in Figure 2, the
system utilizes a hierarchical multi-agent frame-
work that includes a central assistant agent for task
delegation and specialized worker agents for differ-
ent usages. We first introduce our curated ComfyUI
knowledge bases (Sec. 3.1), and the details of the
multi-agent framework (Sec. 3.2). Following this,
we present the interactive chat interface and pro-
vide usage examples in Section 3.3.
3.1 Knowledge Bases
We have constructed three KBs about nodes, mod-
els and workflows. The data is sourced from pop-
ular platforms for sharing generative resources,
ComfyUI-related GitHub repositories, and the
ComfyUI website, with NSFW content filtered out.
For nodes lacking structured documentation, we
automatically generate detailed documentation by
analyzing their GitHub repositories. As shown in
Figure 3, the process begins by setting up a sandbox
environment to run ComfyUI, cloning the GitHub
repositories, and installing the necessary depen-
dencies. After successfully importing the nodes
3

Generation
GitHub
Repository
LLM
Release SandBox
Evaluation
Reject
Final DocCodes
ComfyUI
Environment
Download
Download
Dependent
Packages
Node Meta
Information
Environment Construction
Code
Embedding
Initialize
Node-related
Codes
Prompt
Retrieval
Figure 3: The process of automatic node documentation generation. Starting from GitHub repositories, the
process involves constructing an executable ComfyUI environment, followed by code chunking and retrieval, and
concludes with generating the final documentation.
within ComfyUI, we extract metadata, including
the node class type, input and output parameters.
The GitHub code is then segmented into chunks,
which are embedded using the BGE-M3 embed-
ding (Chen et al., 2024a), followed by retrieval to
locate relevant code for each node. By combin-
ing the metadata with the code, we use an LLM
to generate documentation on node usage and pa-
rameter meanings. The generated documentation
undergoes quality reviews before finalization, with
an example provided in Appendix A.
In addition, since community-sourced content
tends to focus more on installation instructions,
there is often a lack of detailed explanations
of workflow and model functionalities. To ad-
dress this, we leverage the multimodal understand-
ing capabilities of GPT-4o, by prompting it with
community-sourced texts, accompanying images
that typically demonstrate the effects of the work-
flows or models, and any available workflow JSON
files. This approach helps fill in the gaps in usage
descriptions, which is essential for further develop-
ing effective recommendation worker agents.
In total, we have constructed extensive KBs cov-
ering 7K nodes, 62K models, and 9K workflows.
These KBs are continuously expanded weekly,
covering a wide range of conditional image and
video generation tasks. This ensures that ComfyUI-
Copilot remains adaptable to both widely used and
cutting-edge modules.
3.2 Agents
The core of ComfyUI-Copilot is a well-instructed
LLM-based assistant agent, serving as a planner.
Depending on the user instruction, the assistant ei-
ther responds to queries using the constructed KBs
or delegates tasks to appropriate worker agents.
We have created three worker agents for workflow,
nodes and models, which we collectively refer to as
“modules” in this section. The recommendation pro-
cess for each module follows a three-stage pipeline,
progressing from coarse to fine granularity.
In the first stage, we employ an LLM or a large
multimodal model (LMM), such as DeepSeek-V3
or GPT-4o, to expand vague user instructions into
detailed task descriptions and noteworthy consid-
erations. For example, when performing style
transfer, if the LMM identifies the original im-
age as a human portrait, the expanded user intent
will highlight the importance of maintaining sub-
ject consistency. In the second stage, we repre-
sent the user intent as an embedding and calcu-
late its cosine distance with modules in the KB,
obtaining a semantic score simS based on Ope-
nAI’s text-embedding-3-small. Additionally,
we compute a lexical similarity score simL based
on the proportion of overlapping words. The over-
all retrieval score simO is calculated as:
simO = 0.7 × simS + 0.3 × simL (1)
The top 30 modules with the highest simO scores
are then selected for further re-ranking. In the third
stage, we use the GTE-Rerank model1 to determine
the top 3 modules from the above candidates. The
re-ranking score is obtained by providing the re-
ranker with the user intent and the description of
each candidate module. These top 3 modules are
further ranked by considering popularity factors
such as upvotes, downloads, and star statistics.
For the workflow generation agent, in addition
to the module recalling pipeline, we explore the
possibility of generating workflows from scratch
based on code LLMs. As illustrated in Figure 4,
1https://huggingface.co/Alibaba-NLP/
gte-multilingual-reranker-base
4

ComfyUI Workflow
Json File Code
{"3":{"inputs":{"s
teps":20,"sampler_
name":"euler","sch
eduler":"normal","
model":["4",0],"po
sitive":["6",0],"n
egative":["7",
0],...},"class_typ
e":"KSampler","_me
ta":{"title":"KSam
pler"}}}
latent_3 =
KSampler(steps=20,
cfg=8,
sampler_name="euler",
scheduler="normal",
denoise=1,
model=model_4,
positive=conditioning_6,
negative=conditioning_7,
latent_image=latent_5)
Export
Load to Canvas
Convert to Code
Convert back to Json
Figure 4: Different representations of ComfyUI work-
flows and their flexible conversions.
workflows can be represented in three common
formats: ComfyUI flow graphs, JSON, and code.
Following Xue et al. (2024), we enable mutual con-
version between the JSON and code formats based
on graph topology using Python-like syntax. We
adopt code as the primary workflow representation
due to its rich logical and semantic information,
as well as its natural compatibility with LLMs’
code generation capabilities. Given a user instruc-
tion, we prompt top-tier closed-source LLMs with
retrieved nodes and code exemplars to generate
workflows from scratch. Additionally, to investi-
gate whether task-specific open-source models can
replace closed-source LLMs, we fine-tune open-
sourced Qwen2.5-Coder-7B (Hui et al., 2024) on
workflows collected in our KB. Experimental re-
sults in Table 2 show that the fine-tuned model
achieves performance comparable to Claude-3.7-
Sonnet in terms of pass rate and node selection in
generated workflows. More evaluation details are
in Appendix B. However, due to the inherent com-
plexity of workflow generation (Gal et al., 2024),
there remains significant room for improvement in
pass rates.
Implemented with LangChain 2, our frame-
work (Figure 2) equips the assistant agent to au-
tonomously select appropriate worker agents based
on user instructions and short-term memory (i.e.,
message history). The assistant then synthesizes
responses by integrating outputs from these worker
agents, enabling automated ComfyUI-related ques-
tion answering, workflow generation, and module
recommendation. For prompt writing and param-
eter search functionality, we provide illustrative
examples in Section 3.3.
2https://www.langchain.com/
3.3 Interface
As shown in Figure 1, ComfyUI-Copilot is seam-
lessly integrated into the ComfyUI interface. Users
can launch our service with a single click on the
ComfyUI-Copilot icon in the left sidebar. Once
activated, the chat box displays user inputs and our
copilot’s responses. Users can engage in multiple
rounds of conversation and switch between under-
lying LLMs such as DeepSeek-V3 and GPT-4o.
Automatic Workflow Generation. As illus-
trated in Figure 1, ComfyUI-Copilot responds to
user instructions by presenting the top three re-
called workflows. By clicking “Accept”, the se-
lected workflow can be loaded onto the canvas. If
ComfyUI-Copilot detects that any required nodes
are missing, it provides an installation guide and
directs the user to the official GitHub repositories
for easy setup (See Figure 5 (d)).
ComfyUI-related Question Answering. Users
can click on any node to ask shortcut questions
about its usage, parameters, and recommended
downstream nodes. Figure 5 (a) and (c) illustrate
this feature: a user inquires about the input and
output parameters of the “KSampler” node, and
ComfyUI-Copilot not only explains them but also
suggests relevant downstream nodes, such as sub-
graphs for face swapping and image upscaling, to
streamline workflow construction. Additionally, as
shown in Figure 5 (b), ComfyUI-Copilot supports
multilingual queries and responses (e.g., Polish
in the example), enhancing accessibility for users
worldwide.
Node and Model Recommendation. Module
recommendations in ComfyUI-Copilot are context-
aware, taking into account dependencies between
components in the workflow. For instance, certain
LoRA models perform optimally with specific dif-
fusion models. As shown in Figure 6 (a), when
a user requests a LoRA model for text-to-image
generation, ComfyUI-Copilot prompts the user to
specify the diffusion model being used before sug-
gesting compatible LoRA models. Figure 6 (b)
demonstrates an example of node recommendation.
The interface displays detailed descriptions and
GitHub star counts for each recommended node,
allowing users to add their preferred choice to the
canvas with a single click.
In addition to the core features that lower entry
barrier for beginners, we also provide new features
to enhance productivity for experienced ComfyUI
users. The prompt-writing functionality in Fig-
5

(a) ComfyUI-related Question Answering
(c) Downstream Node Completion
(d) Missing Node Installation
(b) Multilingual Support
Figure 5: Examples of ComfyUI-Copilot’s different usages.
DeepSeek-V3 GPT-4o
Node 0.885 0.894
Workflow 0.900 0.892
Table 1: Recall rates of nodes and workflows in
ComfyUI-Copilot based on our constructed test set.
ure 7 helps users refine prompts for text-to-image
generation, resulting in more vivid images. For
example, given a simple instruction like “a cat”,
several detailed prompts are proposed, each lead-
ing to high-quality outputs. Figure 8 illustrates
the parameter search functionality, which enables
users to run parallel experiments by varying key
parameters and batch-processing images for effi-
cient comparison. In the given example, the image
generated using the original workflow does not re-
semble the source sofa image. By experimenting
with different combinations of parameters (specifi-
cally “cfg” and “denoise” in the KSampler node),
the resulting images can be compared side by side,
allowing users to easily identify the optimal param-
eters that best preserve the desired attributes.
4 Usage and Evaluation
To evaluate the performance of ComfyUI-Copilot,
we designed 130 user instructions for workflow re-
call based on our workflow KB. These instructions
are created by rewriting the usage descriptions of
specific workflows, using the target workflow as the
correct answer, Examples include “I need a work-
flow that is suitable for fast upscaling and image
quality restoration”. Similarly, We create 104 node
recommendation instructions based on our node
KB, such as “I want to enhance image aesthetics
and resolution in AI art applications, recommend a
suitable node”.
As shown in Table 1, when recalling the top three
6

workflows and nodes, our framework achieves high
recall rates (over 88.5%) with both GPT-4o and
DeepSeek-V3. This demonstrates the robustness
and effectiveness of our multi-agent framework.
Error analysis on the unsuccessful workflow cases
indicates that, even when the exact target workflow
is not recalled, the suggested workflows often still
fulfill the user’s intended functions.
Since releasing ComfyUI-Copilot on GitHub
on February 23, 2025, online user feedback has
shown a moderately high acceptance rate of 65.4%
for recommended nodes and a notably high accep-
tance rate of 85.9% for proposed workflows. As
the first open-source project for a ComfyUI assis-
tant plugin, ComfyUI-Copilot has quickly attracted
a growing user base with active engagement, re-
ceived over 1.6K Github stars, with 85K queries
from 19K users across 22 countries. Thanks to the
open-source community, we have gathered valu-
able feedback from GitHub issues and are actively
updating features to better address user needs.
5 Conclusion
In this paper, we present ComfyUI-Copilot, an
LLM-powered multi-agent framework designed to
address ComfyUI-related queries and enable one-
click workflow creation, thereby lowering the bar-
riers of ComfyUI development. By leveraging an
LLM as a core assistant agent and integrating spe-
cialized worker agents and extensive knowledge
bases, ComfyUI-Copilot not only enhances the
workflow generation process with a high recall rate,
but also ensures that it stays current with the lat-
est modules in multimodal generation. As the first
project to explore a ComfyUI assistant plugin for
providing instant suggestions, ComfyUI-Copilot
has rapidly gathered over 1.6K stars, attracted 19K
users across 22 countries and processed more than
85K queries. In future work, we plan to incorporate
feedback from GitHub issues and actively update
features to address user pain points, such as auto-
matic workflow and parameter optimization.
Acknowledgments
We want to thank anonymous reviewers for
their helpful comments. This work is jointly
supported by grants: Natural Science Foun-
dation of China (No. 62422603), Guang-
dong Basic and Applied Basic Research Foun-
dation (No. 2023A1515110078), and Shen-
zhen Science and Technology Program (No.
ZDSYS20230626091203008).
