record_id: arxiv:2312.11690
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2312.11690
fetched_title: AGENT-BASED LEARNING OF MATERIALS
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:09:00Z

AGENT-BASED LEARNING OF MATERIALS
DATASETS FROM SCIENTIFIC LITERATURE
Mehrad Ansari1,2 and Seyed Mohamad Moosavi∗,1,2
1Acceleration Consortium, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E5, Canada
2 Department of Chemical Engineering & Applied Chemistry, University of Toronto, Toronto, Ontario M5S 3E5,
Canada
ABSTRACT
Advancements in machine learning and artificial intelligence are transforming materials discovery.
Yet, the availability of structured experimental data remains a bottleneck. The vast corpus of scientific
literature presents a valuable and rich resource of such data. However, manual dataset creation
from these resources is challenging due to issues in maintaining quality and consistency, scalability
limitations, and the risk of human error and bias. Therefore, in this work, we develop a chemist AI
agent, powered by large language models (LLMs), to overcome these challenges by autonomously
creating structured datasets from natural language text, ranging from sentences and paragraphs
to extensive scientific research articles. Our chemist AI agent, Eunomia, can plan and execute
actions by leveraging the existing knowledge from decades of scientific research articles, scientists,
the Internet and other tools altogether. We benchmark the performance of our approach in three
different information extraction tasks with various levels of complexity, including solid-state impurity
doping, metal-organic framework (MOF) chemical formula, and property relations. Our results
demonstrate that our zero-shot agent, with the appropriate tools, is capable of attaining performance
that is either superior or comparable to the state-of-the-art fine-tuned materials information extraction
methods. This approach simplifies compilation of machine learning-ready datasets for various
materials discovery applications, and significantly ease the accessibility of advanced natural language
processing tools for novice users in natural language. The methodology in this work is developed as
an open-source software on https://github.com/AI4ChemS/Eunomia.
1 Introduction
The past decade’s extraordinary achievements in leveraging machine learning for chemical discovery highlight the
power of accessible knowledge and structured data [ 1–3]. However, a significant portion of chemical knowledge,
particularly the experimental ones, is scattered across scientific literature in an unstructured format[4]. Researchers
face challenges in effectively utilizing existing knowledge for design of experiments, as well as in comprehending the
entirety of previous works in a field. Thus, the development of methodologies to extract information from the literature
and convert it into structured data will play a fundamental role in advancing the machine learning for molecules and
materials.
Natural Language Processing (NLP) is a powerful tool for extracting information from scientific literature. Conventional
NLP methods have been used in materials and chemical sciences [ 5–10] for Named Entity Recognition. However,
these methods are limited in other NLP tasks that are needed for a general-purpose data extraction tool, including
Co-reference Resolution, Relation Extraction, Template Filling, Argument Mining, and Entity Linking. To better
understand these NLP terminologies, let us consider an example taken from an abstract of a materials paper [11] in the
field of metal-organic frameworks (MOFs):
∗Corresponding author: mohamad.moosavi@utoronto.ca
arXiv:2312.11690v1 [cs.AI] 18 Dec 2023

An isoreticular series of cobalt-adeninate bio-MOFs (bio – MOFs-11–14) is reported. The pores of
bio – MOFs-11–14 are decorated with acetate, propionate, butyrate, and valerate, respectively. The
nitrogen (N2) and carbon dioxide (CO2) adsorption properties of these materials are studied and
compared. The isosteric heats of adsorption for CO2 are calculated, and the CO2 : N2 selectivities
for each material are determined. As the lengths of the aliphatic chains decorating the pores in
bio – MOFs-11–14 increase, the BET surface areas decrease from 1148 m2 g-1 to 17 m2 g-1 while
the CO2 : N2 selectivities predicted from ideal adsorbed solution theory at 1 bar and 273 K for a
10 : 90 CO2 : N2 mixture range from 73 : 1 for bio – MOF-11 to 123 : 1 for bio – MOF-12 and
finally to 107 : 1 for bio – MOF-13. At 298 K, the selectivities are 43 : 1 for bio – MOF-11, 52 : 1
for bio – MOF-12, and 40 : 1 for bio – MOF-13. The water stability of bio – MOFs-11–14 increases
with increasing aliphatic chain length.
• Named Entity Recognition involves identifying and classifying the specific entities within the text into
predefined categories (i.e., chemical compounds: “bio-MOFs-11–14”, “acetate”, experimental conditions: “1
bar”, “273 K”, “10 : 90 CO2 : N2 mixture”).
• Co-reference Resolution focuses on finding all expressions that refer to the same entity in the text. As an
example, phrases like “these materials”, “each material” are references that relate back to the bio-MOFs-11-14
mentioned in the first sentence.
• Relation Extraction involves extracting semantic relationships from the text, which usually occur between
two or more entities (i.e., the impact of “aliphatic chain lengths” on “BET surface areas” and “CO2 : N2
selectivities”).
• Template Filing is an efficient approach to extract and structure complex information from text. As an
example: material name: bio-MOFs-11–14.
• Argument Mining focuses on the automatic identification and extracts the reasoning presented within the text.
As an example, the “increase in the water stability” of the mentioned MOFs are connected to the “increasing
length of the aliphatic chains”.
• Entity Linking takes one step further than named entity recognition and distinguishes between similarly
named entities (i.e., the term “bio-MOFs” would be linked to databases or literature that describe these
materials in detail.
The emergence of Large Language Models (LLMs) or foundation models, shows a great promise in tackling these
complex NLP tasks [7, 12–14]. Huang and Cole [15] fine-tuned a language model (BERT) on battery publications to
extract device-level information from a paragraph that contains one device only. Dunn et al. [7] showed that fine-tuned
LLMs using 100-1000 data points can perform Relation Extraction as well as template filling, enabling conversion of the
extracted information into user-defined output formats. Despite these promising results, these methods require training
data, limiting their ease of use and broad applicability. Moreover, LLM based approaches have not been explored for
more intricate challenges, such as argument mining and co-reference resolution. These tasks are critical for practically
using NLP for automated database development. For example, in one article, multiple materials might be discussed
and authors use abbreviations like “compound 1” or simply “1” in the entire research manuscript for referencing after
initially defining the chemical compound in the introduction section. Additionally, description of material properties
often come with various interpretations, limiting using rigid name entity matching. As implementations of standalone
LLMs fall short in addressing these intricate tasks, new methods are needed to enable reliable information extraction.
An effective approach is to augment LLMs with domain-specific toolkits. These specialized tools offer precise answers,
thus addressing the inherent limitations of LLMs in specific domains, and enhancing their overall performance and
applicability [16–19].
In this work, we introduce an autonomous AI agent, Eunomia, augmented with chemistry-informed tools, designed to
extract materials science-relevant information from unstructured text and convert it into structured databases. With an
LLM at its core, our AI agent is capable of strategizing and executing actions by tapping into a wealth of knowledge
from academic publications, domain-specific experts, the Internet, and other user-defined resources (see Figure 1).
We show that this method streamlines data extraction, achieving remarkable accuracy and performance solely with a
pre-trained LLM (GPT-4 [20]), eliminating the need for fine-tuning. It offers adaptability by accommodating a variety
of information extraction tasks through natural language text prompts for new output schemas and reducing the risk of
hallucinations through a chain-of-verification process. This capability extends beyond what a standalone LLM can offer.
Eunomia simplifies the development of tailored datasets from literature for domain experts, eliminating the need for
extensive programming, NLP, or machine learning expertise.
2

This manuscript is organized as follows; Benchmarking and evaluating the model performance on three different
materials NLP tasks with varying level of complexity are represented in Section 3. This is followed by Section 4, with a
discussion on the implications of our findings, the advantages and limitations of our approach, as well as suggested
directions for future work. Finally, in Section 5, we describe our methodology on agent’s toolkits and evaluation
metrics.
Figure 1: Agent-based learning framework overview. The AI agent equipped with various tools (online dataset
search, document search, etc.) is tasked to extract information. The example shows the task of identifying all MOFs
from a given research article, and predicting their property (e.g. water stability) by providing the reasoning for its
decision. This reasoning is the exact in-context sentence from the paper, which is autonomously re-evaluated via
the chain-of-verification tool of the agent to ensure its actual logical connection to the water stability property and
reduce likelihood of hallucinations. The agent outputs a customized dataset that can be used to develop supervised or
unsupervised machine learning methods.
2 AI Agent
In the realm of artificial intelligence, an “agent” is an autonomous entity capable of taking action based on its
environment. In this work, we developed a chemist AI agent, Eunomia, to autonomously extract information from
scientific literature (Figure 1). We use an LLM to serve as the brain of our agent [ 21]. The LLM is equipped with
advanced capabilities like planning and tool use to act beyond just a text generator, and act as a comprehensive problem
solver, enabling effective interactions with the environment. We use ReAct architecture [22] for planning, enabling both
reasoning and action. Our agent can interact with external sources like knowledge bases or environments to obtain
more information. These knowledge bases are developed as toolkits (see method section for details) allowing the
agent to extract relevant information from research articles, publicly available datasets, and built-in domain-specific
chemical knowledge, ensuring its proficiency in playing the role of an expert chemist. We use OpenAI’s GPT-4 [20]
with a temperature of zero as our LLM and LangChain [ 23] for the application framework development (note the
choice of LLM is only a hyperparameter and other LLMs can be also used with our agent). The application of LLMs
in developing autonomous agents is a growing area of research [ 17, 22, 24–27], with a detailed survey available in
Ref. [28] for further insights.
In addition to the standard search and text manipulation tools, we have implemented a Chain-of-Verification (CoV)
tool to enhance the robustness of our AI agent against hallucination. Hallucination in a LLM refers to the generation
of content that strays from factual reality or includes fabricated information [ 29]. In the CoV approach, the agent
iteratively assesses its responses to ensure they remain logically consistent and coherent (see method section 5.1.2 for
details). This addition helps particularly with eliminating mistakenly extracted data related to semantically similar
properties. An illustrative example is the case of stability of materials, where thermal, mechanical, and chemical
stabilities might be confused by the agent. Figure 2 illustrates how CoV process works in action: the agent is tasked
3

to identify MOFs and the corresponding water stability data in a paper. The agent initially misclassifies a thermally
stable MOF as water-stable, but then it corrects this mistake by a comprehensive review using the CoV tool. This tool
improves the performance of the agent and ensures robust data extraction.
Figure 2: Iterative Chain of Verification (CoV). The agent is tasked with reading a materials research article and
predicting water stability of any mentioned MOFs by providing reasoning. In the initial run, the agent confuses water
stability with thermal stability and mistakenly predicts the second MOF as water-stable. The CoV tool evaluates the
agent’s decisions in its precious step by validating the justification against the pre-defined water stability criteria and
disregards this prediction.
4

3 Case studies
We evaluate the performance of our AI agent by benchmarking it across three different materials NLP tasks, with
increasing task complexity (Table 1). In our assessment, we include a wide range of text lengths, including sentences,
paragraphs and entire manuscript, as well as different NLP tasks discussed in the introduction. The first case study
focuses on assessing the agent’s performance on NLP tasks of lower complexity, specifically Named Entity Recognition
and Relation Extraction. For this, we use our agent to extract host-to-many dopants relationships from a single
sentence. The second case study, with medium NLP complexity, involves obtaining MOFs’ chemical formula and
their corresponding guest species from a paragraph with multiple sentences. Finally, the third case study centers on
predicting a given property of MOFs based on the context coming from a materials research paper. The property of
interest in our work is water stability. This case study aims to, in addition to Named Entity Recognition and Relation
Extraction, evaluate the co-reference resolution and argument mining proficiency of our AI agent, tailored for chemists,
which involves a high level of NLP complexity. In all case studies, our chemist AI agent, Eunomia, is a zero-shot
learner that is equipped with the Doc Search tool (see Section 5.1.1). We have also conducted additional experiments
by equipping Eunomia with the chain-of-verification (CoV) tool, as described in Section 5.1.2. This is referred to as
Eunomia + CoV from here on.
To fairly compare the performance of our agent with the state-of-the-art fine-tuned LLM methods, the evaluation
methodology for the first two case studies mirrors precisely that of Dunn et al. [7] (see Section 5.2 for details), serving
as a benchmark reference. In this study, Dunn et al. [7] is referred to as LLM-NERRE, which involves fine-tuning a
pre-trained LLM (GPT-3 [30]) on 100-1000 set of manually annotated examples, and then using the model to extract
information from unstructured text.
Table 1: Overview of the three case studies based on their context from which data is extracted, NLP tasks and
complexity
Case Study Context NLP Tasks Task Complexity
1. Host-to-many Dopants Relation Sentence Named Entity Recognition, Re-
lation Extraction
2. MOF Formula and Guest Species Relation Paragraph Named Entity Recognition, Re-
lation Extraction
3. MOF Property Relation Research paper Named Entity Recognition, Re-
lation Extraction, Template Fil-
ing, Argument Mining, Entity
Linking
3.1 Case Study 1: Host-to-many Dopants Relation
This case study aims to extract structured information about solid-state impurity doping from a single sentence. The
objective is to identify the two entities “host” and “dopant”. “Host” refers to the foundational crystal, sample, or
category of material characterized by essential descriptors in its proximate context, such as “ZnO2 nanoparticles”,
“LiNbO3”, or “half-Heuslers”. “Dopant” means the elements or ions that represent a minority component, deliberately
introduced impurities, or specific atomic-scale defects or carriers of electric charge like “hole-doped” or “S vacancies”.
A single host can be combined with multiple dopants, through individual doping or simultaneous doping with different
species, and one dopant can associate with various host materials. The text may contain numerous dopant-host pairings
within the same sentence, and also instances of dopants and hosts that do not interact.
Eunomia shows an excellent performance in this task, demonstrating the effectiveness of our approach in Named
Entity Recognition and Relation Extraction. Performance comparison between our chemist AI agent (Eunomia), and
LLM-NERRE can be found in Table 2. In this setting, the same above definition of hosts and dopants are passed to
Eunomia via the input prompt, while LLM-NERRE is fine-tuned on 413 sentences. The testing set contains 77 sentences.
Notably, in both tasks, Eunomia + CoV exceeds the performance of LLM-NERRE in terms of the F1 score. This clearly
demonstrates the effectiveness of our approach compared to fine-tuning, which can be labor-intensive and error-prone.
We instruct Eunomia not to make up answers, which lead to a more cautious outcome, wherein uncertain or unclear
inputs yield no output. As an example in the sentence “An anomalous behavior of the emission properties of alkali
halides doped with heavy impurities, stimulated new efforts for its interpretation, invoking delicate and sophisticated
mechanisms whose interest transcends the considered specific case.”, the ground-truth host materials is “alkali halides”.
However, due to the nature of exact-word matching metric implemented in Ref. [7] a cautious agent with no predictions
5

Table 2: Performance comparison between LLM-NERRE, Eunomia, and Eunomia + CoV on hosts and dopants relation
extraction (Case Study 1). Eunomia embeddings are generated using OpenAI’s text-ada-002. Best scores for each entity
are highlighted in bold text.
Model Entity Precision (Exact Match) Recall (Exact Match) F1 Score (Exact Match)
LLM-NERRE [7] hosts 0.892 0.874 0.883
Eunomia hosts 0.753 0 .768 0 .760
Eunomia + CoV hosts 0.964 0.853 0.905
LLM-NERRE [7] dopants 0.831 0 .812 0 .821
Eunomia dopants 0.859 0 .788 0 .822
Eunomia + CoV dopants 0.962 0.882 0.920
for the host entity will be penalized with two false negatives, one for each word in the ground-truth, leading to lower
recall score.
3.2 Case Study 2: MOF Formula and Guest Species Relation
The goal of this case study is to identify MOF formula and guest species from unstructured text, as a paragraph with
multiple sentences. The MOF formula refers to the chemical formula of a MOF, which is an important piece of
information for characterizing and identifying MOFs. The guest species, on the other hand, are chemical species that
have been incorporated, stored, or adsorbed in the MOF. These species are of interest because MOFs are often used for
ion and gas separation, and the presence of specific guest species can affect the performance of the MOF. We limit our
method to stand-alone Eunomia without CoV due to the complexity of defining a chemistry-informed CoV verification
tool for this specific task. It should be noted that Dunn et al. [7] also included results on the identification of synthesis
descriptions and applications pertaining to MOFs. However, as the metric of exact-word matching reported in Dunn
et al. [7] does not fairly and adequately reflect the model performance for the multi-word (> 2 words) nature of these
outputs, we have limited our benchmarking to the MOF formula and guest species identification only.
Table 3: Performance comparison between LLM-NERRE and Eunomia on MOF formula and guest species relation
extraction (Case study 2). Eunomia embeddings are generated using OpenAI text-ada-002. Best scores for each entity
are highlighted in bold text.
Model Entity Precision (Exact Match) Recall (Exact Match) F1 Score (Exact Match)
LLM-NERRE [7] mof formula 0.409 0 .455 0 .424
Eunomia mof formula 0.623 0.589 0.606
LLM-NERRE [7] guest species 0.588 0.665 0.606
Eunomia guest species 0.429 0.923 0.585
Table 3 shows the performance comparison between Eunomia and LLM-NERRE on the MOF formula and guest species
relation extraction task. While Eunomia shows a superior performance on the MOF formula compared to LLM-NERRE,
the relatively low performance of both approaches is related to the nature of the exact word matching. Using semantic
similarity would be a more appropriate indicator in this context. On the guest species entity, while Eunomia shows a
high recall (0.923), precision is relatively poor (0.429). This can be attributed to how the exact-word matching metrics
have been defined in Ref. [7], where precision is majorly lowered by the presence of the extra unmatched predicted
words (false positives), while recall remains high because all ground truth items were found in the predicted words.
3.3 Case Study 3: MOF Property Relation
This case study aims to mimic a practical scenario of developing datasets from scientific literature, where we evaluate
the agent’s performance on extracting MOF’s water stability. To excel in this goal, the agent must identify all MOFs
mentioned within the research paper, evaluate their water stability, and support these evaluations using exact sentences
derived from the document. Such tasks are inherently linked to the NLP functions of Named Entity Recognition, Co-
reference Resolution, Relation Extraction, and Argument Mining. This is particularly a challenging task as researcher
report the water stability in various ways, using phrases ranging from “the material remains crystalline in humid
conditions” to “the MOF is stable in wide range of pH”, or “the material is not soluble in water”.
6

For this case study, we created a hand-labeled dataset based on a selection of 101 materials research papers, which
contain a selection of 371 MOFs. Three expert chemists manually read through and review each paper, pinpointing the
MOFs referenced within. A portion of these articles are selected considering the original work by Burtch et al. [31],
where they developed a dataset of MOF names and their water stability by manually reading 111 research articles. To
mimic the practical data extraction scenario, in which the agent is passed many articles, many of which do not contain
the desired information, we included articles with no information about water stability. Each MOF in our set is assigned
to one of the three classes of “Stable”, “Unstable”, and “Not provided”. Figure 3.a presents the distribution of the
classes within this dataset.
For this case study, we have established criteria to characterize water-stable MOFs, drawing from the study by Burtch
et al. [31] and our own chemical intuition. A water-stable MOF should meet the following criteria:
• No alteration in properties after being subjected to moisture or steam, or when soaked or boiled in water or an
aqueous solution.
• Preservation of its porous architecture in liquid (water) environments.
• Sustained crystallinity without loss of structural integrity in aqueous environments.
• Insoluble in water or aqueous solutions.
• Exhibiting a pronounced rise in its water adsorption isotherm.
These water stability guidelines are defined as rules to Eunomia within the input prompt, as well as in its equipped CoV
tool.
Eunomia with CoV tool retrieve most (yield of 86.20%) of the reported MOFs and shows an excellent performance
(accuracy of 0.91) in inferring their water stability. This high yield and accuracy demonstrates the capability of our
approach in extracting desired knowledge from the natural text. As expected, in the absence of CoV , there is a marginal
decrease in accuracy to 0.86, along with a yield reduction to 82.70%. Taking into account the confusion matrix in
Figure 3.b, it is evident that our agent adopts a cautious approach in its predictions. This is reflected in the substantial
number of "Not provided" predictions which, upon comparison with the actual ground-truth class, indicates a propensity
of the agent to acknowledge the insufficiency of information for making a definitive prediction, rather than mistakenly
categorizing samples into the incorrect "Stable" or "Unstable" classes, and contaminating the agent’s resulting dataset
with unwanted noise.
Figure 3: Performance of the AI agent in information retrieval. a) Class distribution for water stability in the hand-
labeled ground-truth dataset of 371 MOFs based on 101 research articles. b) Confusion matrix for ternary classification
of water stability property with CoV tool using OpenAI text-ada-002 embeddings. It is apparent that our agent exercises
cautious in its judgments. Specifically, the abundance of "Not provided" predictions, when matched against their actual
ground-truth categories, suggests that the agent prefers to concede some uncertainty in instances where making an
accurate prediction is not feasible, rather than incorrectly assigning samples to the "Stable" or "Unstable" categories.
The ternary accuracy is found to be 0.91 with a yield of 86.20%.
7

4 Discussion
We presented a high performing and robust method for extracting domain specific information from complex, unstruc-
tured text - ranging from sentences and paragraphs to extensive research articles - using AI agents. Scientists and
researchers can use our open-source application to effortlessly develop tailored datasets for their specific areas and use
them for downstream predictive tasks[32]. While currently the cost of querying large datasets may become expensive,
we expect the rapid advancements in LLMs will diminish this cost.
Unlike other methods that follow a pipeline-based or end-to-end approach, our agent-based method could appeal to
domain experts due to its minimal demand for programming skills, NLP and machine learning knowledge. Users
are not required to rigidly define an output schema or engage in the meticulous task of creating manual annotations
for the purpose of fine-tuning. Rather, they can simply prompt the agent with more context and describe how their
desired output should be formatted in natural language. Moreover, the agent can easily be extended and equipped with
other tools (e.g. Dataset Search, CSV Generator, etc.) to be adapted to other problems. For example, we showed that,
by equipping the agent with the chain-of-verification tool (CoV), we can minimize Hallucinations and improve the
agent’s performance. Similarly, by including reasoning tools, we can ask the agent to explain its reasoning based on
the provided context to develop more transparent workflows for the LLM-based methods, and reduce their known
“black-box” nature. This, simultaneously, offers a great opportunity for human-in-the-loop oversight, especially for
tasks of critical importance.
Our results reveal an important observation: while large language models are few-shot learners [30], AI agents with
appropriate tools and instructions are capable of being zero-shot learners. This brings an excellent opportunity to boost
the performance of standalone LLMs across various domain-specific tasks without having to go through labor-intensive
fine-tuning processes. A future thorough and systematic analysis of prompt sensitivity can provide valuable insights
into this observation.
5 Methods
5.1 Agent Toolkits
5.1.1 Doc Search
This tool allows for extracting relevant knowledge materials properties from text, ranging from a single sentence and
paragraph to a scientific research paper. The research papers are obtained from various chemistry journals including
Royal Society of Chemistry (RSC), American Chemical Society (ACS), Elsevier, Inorganic Chemistry, Structural
Chemistry, Coordination Chemistry, Wiley, and Crystallographic Communications as a PDF or in XML format (the
XML files are obtained through a legal agreement between University of Toronto and ACS). Inspired by the paper-qa
Python package (https://github.com/whitead/paper-qa), this tool aims at obtaining the most relevant context (sentences)
from the papers to a given input query. This involves embedding the paper and queries into numerical vectors and
identifying topk passages within the document that either mention or can somehow imply the property of interest
for a MOF. k is set to 9 in our case studies, and is dynamically adjusted depending on the length of the paper to
avoid OpenAI’s token limitation error. We use OpenAI’s text-ada-002 embeddings [ 33] to represent texts as high
dimensional vectors, which are stored as a vector database using FAISS [34]. Note that the choice of embedding is
another hyperparameter that can be changed in future studies. For benchmarking purposes, we have also conducted all
case studies with the newly released Cohere embed-english-v3.0 embeddings (see Supporting Information).
The semantic similarity search is ranked using Maximum Marginal Relevance (MMR) [35] based on cosine similarity,
defined as,
MMR = arg max
di∈R\S
[
λ· cos(di,q )− (1−λ)· max
dj∈S
cos(di,d j)
]
(1)
wheredi is a document from the set of retrieved documentsR,S is the set of already selected documents,q is the query.
λ is a parameter between 0 and 1 that balances the trade-off between relevance (to the query) and diversity (or novelty
with respect to already selected documents). In this work, we use the default value of 0.5. The idea behind MMR is
to retrieve or select documents that are not just relevant to the query (or topic of interest), but are also diverse among
themselves, thus minimizing redundancy. This tool provides the exact in-context sentence from the paper that provides
some reasoning for the agent’s choice, allowing for a more methodical evaluation of the agent’s decision-making
process, and reducing the likelihood of hallucinations or fabrications with the human-in-loop verification of the resulting
datasets. It is important to note that in some unsuccessful experiments, we observed that the AI agent repeatedly referred
back to the document, even after pinpointing the correct answer. Although this minor issue remained unresolved, we
introduced an iteration limit for the agent to avoid unnecessary model running costs.
8

5.1.2 Chain-of-Verification
Inspired by the Chain-of-Verification (CoV) [36] methodology, this tool entails the following steps: initially, the agent
provides a preliminary reply, which is followed by iterative verification queries to authenticate the initial draft. The agent
independently responds to these queries to ensure the answers remain impartial and unaffected by other responses, and
finally it produces its conclusive, verified response. Our implementation of CoV stands apart from the method described
in Dhuliawala et al. [36], specifically in how the verification queries are generated. While in the Dhuliawala et al. [36]’s
approach, the LLM produces task-specific queries, our method allows for user customization. This adaptability not
only enables broader, more tailored domain-specific fact-checking across various tasks, but also opens up opportunities
for human-in-the-loop verification, enhancing the accuracy and relevance of the results. This tool substantially boosts
agent efficacy and mitigates the likelihood of hallucinations, especially in the events of completing complex tasks (see
Figure 2 for more details). It is important to note that for unknown reasons, we have observed that the CoV tool usage
was skipped by the agent on a few occasional instances.
5.1.3 Dataset Search
This tool allows for obtaining the chemical structure of MOFs from publically available datasets, including the Materials
Projects [37], Crystallography Open Database (COD) [ 38–45], Cambridge Structural Database (CSD) [ 46], and
QMOF [47, 48].
5.1.4 CSV Generator
This tool stores the output of the agent into a CSV or JSON file.
5.2 Evaluation Metrics
Multiple metrics have been defined to assess agent’s performance across different case studies. Precision, recall and F1
score are defined as,
Precision = TP
TP +FP , (2)
Recall = TP
TP +FN , (3)
F1 Score = 2× Precision× Recall
Precision + Recall, (4)
where,TP represents true positives,FP stands for false positives, andFN denotes false negatives. Precision measures
the accuracy of the positive predictions, recall measures the fraction of actual positives that were correctly identified,
and the F1 score is the harmonic mean of precision and recall. Binary classification accuracy is defined as,
Binary accuracy = TP +TN
N , (5)
In Case studies 1 and 2 (Sections 3.1 and 3.2), the evaluation metrics used are precisely those defined in the work of
[7]. In specific, they assessed named entity relationships on a word-to-word matching basis by initially decomposing an
entityE into a collection ofk words separated by whitespace, denoted asE ={w1,w 2,w 3,...,w k}. For evaluating
entities in Named Entity Recognition exclusively, they enumerated the words that are identical in both the true entity set
Etrue and the test entity setEtest as true positives (Etrue∩Etest), and the distinct elements in each set as false positives
(Etest\Etrue) or false negatives (Etrue\Etest). For instance, if the true entity is “Bi 2Te3 thin film” and the predicted
entity is “Bi2Te3 film sample”, they noted two true positive matches (“Bi2Te3”, “film”), one false negative (“thin”), and
one false positive (“sample”). An exceptional case arises for formula-type entities critical to material identification,
wherebyEtest must encompass allwi interpreted as stoichiometries to consider anywi∈Etest as correct. For example,
with “Bi2Te3 thin film” asEtrue and “thin film” asEtest, three false negatives would be registered. For more details on
the scoring metrics and the case studies, readers are encouraged to refer to Ref. [7].
For our last case study in Section 3.3 (predicting water stability of MOFs), the ternary accuracy is defined as,
Ternary accuracy = TP S +TP U +TP N P
N , (6)
9

whereN shows the total number of predictions andS,U,NP denote the three classes “Stable”, “Unstable”, and “Not
provided”, respectively.TP i shows then number of instances correctly predicted as classi. Additionally, we evaluate
the information recovery capabilities of the agent by defining yield as
Yield = N
NGT
, (7)
whereNGT is the ground-truth number of MOFs mentioned in the research papers, regardless whether the paper
discusses water stability or not.
Acknowledgements
Research reported in this work was supported by the Acceleration Consortium at the University of Toronto. SMM
acknowledges the support by the Natural Sciences and Engineering Research Council of Canada (NSERC) under grant
number RGPIN-2023-04232. The authors thank Alexander Dunn and Andrew S. Rosen for their assistance on the
implementation of LLM-NERRE. The authors also thank Haoning Yuan for assisting in manual curation of the water
stability dataset used in Section 3.3.
Data and Code Availability
All data (including the dataset used for case study 3) and code used to produce results in this study are publically
available in the following GitHub repository: https://github.com/AI4ChemS/Eunomia. The methodology in this work is
also developed as an open-source application on https://eunomia.streamlit.app.
