record_id: arxiv:2603.11935
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.11935
fetched_title: MobileKernelBench: Can LLMs Write Efficient Kernels for Mobile Devices?
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:34Z

MobileKernelBench: Can LLMs Write Efficient
Kernels for Mobile Devices?
Xingze Zou 1∗ Jing Wang 1∗ Yuhua Zheng1 Xueyi Chen2 Haolei Bai2 Lingcheng Kong3
Syed A.R. Abu-Bakar4 Zhaode Wang5 Chengfei Lv5 Haoji Hu1† Huan Wang2†
1Zhejiang University 2Westlake University 3HKUST 4Universiti Teknologi Malaysia 5Alibaba
{zeezou, j_wang, YuhuaZheng, haoji_hu}@zju.edu.cn
{chenxueyi, wanghuan}@westlake.edu.cn, Baih0011@e.ntu.edu.sg
LingchengKong05@outlook.com, e-syed@utm.my
{zhaode.wzd, chengfei.lcf}@alibaba-inc.com
Abstract
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remarkable capabilities in code
generation, yet their potential for generating kernels specifically for mobile de-
vices remains largely unexplored. In this work, we extend the scope of automated
kernel generation to the mobile domain to investigate the central question:Can
LLMs write efficient kernels for mobile devices?To enable systematic investiga-
tion, we introduceMobileKernelBench, a comprehensive evaluation framework
comprising a benchmark prioritizing operator diversity and cross-framework in-
teroperability, coupled with an automated pipeline that bridges the host-device
gap for on-device verification. Leveraging this framework, we conduct extensive
evaluation on the CPU backend of Mobile Neural Network (MNN), revealing that
current LLMs struggle with the engineering complexity and data scarcity inher-
ent to mobile frameworks; standard models and even fine-tuned variants exhibit
high compilation failure rates (over 54%) and negligible performance gains due
to hallucinations and a lack of domain-specific grounding. To overcome these
limitations, we propose the Mobile Kernel Agent (MoKA), a multi-agent sys-
tem equipped with repository-aware reasoning and a plan-and-execute paradigm.
Validated on MobileKernelBench, MoKA achieves state-of-the-art performance,
boosting compilation success to 93.7% and enabling 27.4% of generated kernels
to deliver measurable speedups over native libraries. Our dataset is available on
Mobilekernelbench.
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) have achieved remarkable success in the field of code generation,
with performance further enhanced by specialized methodologies such as domain-adaptive fine-
tuning and agentic reasoning frameworks [ 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7]. Building on this foundation, a series
of recent studies have begun to systematically evaluate the application of LLMs in synthesizing
performance-optimized CUDA kernels [1, 8, 9]. These works demonstrate that LLMs can exhibit a
significant degree of hardware awareness, enabling them to write high-performance kernels tailored
for server-grade GPUs. With the rapid surge in demand for mobile AI applications, on-device
inference has attracted increasing attention for its data safety, low inference latency, and personalized
service. However, deploying deep learning models on mobile devices also demands substantial effort
in kernel development, constituting a highly challenging engineering barrier that has not yet been
investigated. In this work, we extend the scope of automated kernel generation to the mobile domain,
∗Equal Contribution
†Corresponding Author
Preprint.
arXiv:2603.11935v2 [cs.LG] 15 Mar 2026

20
405060
80
100
CSR
FCR
fast0.5
fast1.0
fast1.5
(b) Methods Performance
Qw3-32B
Qw3-32B-LoRA
Qw3-4B
Qw3-4B-GRPO
Claude (@10)
MoKA (ours)
10
20
30
40
50
CSR
FCR
fast0.5
fast1.0
fast1.5
(a) Baseline Models Performance
Claude
GPT-5
Gemini
Llama
DeepSeek
Qwen3
Figure 1:Performance evaluation on MobileKernelBench across three metrics:compilation
success rate (CSR), functional correctness rate (FCR), and performance speedup (fast p) [1].(a)
Baseline LLM performance:We benchmark prevalent open- and closed-source LLMs, revealing sig-
nificant shortcomings in their ability to generate functional and efficient mobile kernels.(b) Method
comparison: We compare our proposed MoKA against common training methods, including LoRA
and GRPO. The red circle (marked at 50%) corresponds to the outer limit of plot (a), highlighting
that MoKA achieves substantial improvements, surpassing the performance ceiling of both baseline
models and naive fine-tuning approaches.
presenting a preliminary investigation into the following question:Can LLMs write efficient kernels
for mobile devices?
We first investigate and compare the differences between server-side and mobile-side kernel devel-
opment in Tab. 1. Mobile kernel development functions as the critical bridge for migrating models
from training environments to resource-constrained edge devices, characterized by three distinct
features: (1)Compatibility priority: the primary objective is to ensure broad support, necessitating
the implementation of a vast spectrum of operators to cover diverse training frameworks; (2)Engi-
neering complexity: the development process, however, is severely hampered by the fragmentation
of the mobile ecosystem, where developers must navigate a myriad of heterogeneous backends and
architectures; and (3)Data scarcity:the nascent nature of the mobile inference landscape results
in a lack of high-quality reference implementations, creating a data-poor environment that poses
significant generalization challenges for LLMs. Consequently, existing research is ill-suited for this
specific domain: current benchmarks prioritize the algorithmic complexity of kernels rather than
the operator diversity required for edge compatibility, while the tight coupling between kernels and
the corresponding framework has precluded the establishment of systematic pipelines for evaluating
LLM-generated kernels directly on mobile devices.
To address these limitations, we introduceMobileKernelBench, as illustrated in Fig. 2, a compre-
hensive system comprising a dedicated benchmark and an automated evaluation pipeline tailored
for mobile frameworks. Diverging from the difficulty-tiered classification of prior works [1, 8], our
benchmark prioritizes operator diversity by curating 190 tasks across 12 categories of 95 primitive
operators to facilitate wider model migration. Simultaneously, we ensure cross-framework interop-
erability via standardized PyTorch and Open Neural Network Exchange (ONNX) test data, acting
as a universal bridge to mitigate inconsistent framework support and tackle ecosystem fragmenta-
tion. Complementing the benchmark, we introduce an automated evaluation pipeline to bridge the
separation between host-side development and device-side testing inherent to mobile deployment.
By automating the entire lifecycle spanning registration, cross-compilation, and on-device verifi-
cation, it not only satisfies the concerns mentioned in previous work [ 1] but also streamlines the
desktop-to-mobile workflow to capture granular debugging and performance data akin to a real-world
developer’s environment.
2

Building on the proposed evaluation pipeline design, we establish a concrete evaluation environment
using Mobile Neural Network (MNN) [10] framework with a CPU backend. We first conduct a com-
prehensive evaluation of state-of-the-art (SOTA) LLMs on MobileKernelBench. Our experimental
results show that, due to limited framework-specific knowledge and insufficient optimization capabil-
ity, LLM-generated kernels achieve performance parity with native framework implementations in at
most 16.3% of benchmark cases, illustrated in Fig. 1 (a). Strikingly, more than 54.7% of the generated
kernels fail at the compilation stage, primarily driven by hallucinated APIs or invalid framework
usage, revealing a critical lack of grounding in framework-specific logic. Notably, only a small
fraction of kernels achieve measurable speedups over the baseline. Subsequently, we apply standard
training strategies, including LoRA [11] and GRPO [12], yet observe negligible improvements. We
attribute these persistent failures to the scarcity of high-quality data within specific mobile inference
frameworks. This data poverty creates a severe deficit in domain-specific knowledge, spanning
framework specifications, optimization heuristics, and functional definitions, preventing LLMs from
mastering this highly specialized domain.
To further explore the potential of LLMs in mobile kernel generation and address their identified
limitations, we propose the Mobile Kernel Agent (MoKA), a specialized multi-agent system tailored
for mobile kernel development. The MoKA follows a multi-round plan-and-execute paradigm, con-
sisting of a code agent responsible for operator generation and two planning agents that respectively
formulate execution strategies for compilation, functional correctness verification, and performance
optimization. These agents are equipped with repository-aware and information parsing tools, en-
abling them to access and reason over realistic deployment signals. As illustrated in Fig. 1 (b), when
evaluated on MobileKernelBench, the MoKA substantially outperforms the baseline and establishes
SOTA performance among all tested LLMs, with 93.7% of kernels achieving successful compilation
and 27.4% delivering measurable performance speedups. This initiative advances the frontier of
mobile kernel generation, offering significant insights into enhancing LLM capabilities within such
highly specialized domains.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
• We present the first systematic study extending automated kernel generation to the mobile
domain, identifying three distinguishing features of mobile development and revealing the
fundamental gap between server-side and mobile-side development.
• We introduceMobileKernelBench, a comprehensive evaluation system comprising a bench-
mark and an automated pipeline, facilitating systematic mobile kernel evaluation and granu-
lar information capture.
• We proposeMoKA, a multi-agent system designed to autonomously navigate the complexi-
ties of API usage and performance optimization in data-scarce environments.
• We conduct extensive experiments on MobileKernelBench, revealing that while standard
LLMs suffer from severe hallucinations and compilation failures, MoKA effectively over-
comes these barriers, achieving SOTA performance over other LLMs.
2 Related Work
2.1 LLM for Kernel Generation
LLMs have shown proficiency in general code generation [ 13, 14, 2, 3], and recent works have
focused on leveraging them for high-performance computing [15, 16]. To systematically assess these
capabilities, benchmarks such as KernelBench [1], MultiKernelBench [8], and TritonBench [9] have
been developed, evaluating both correctness and efficiency across diverse platforms and paradigms.
Recognizing the limitations of direct prompting, subsequent studies have integrated iterative feedback
loops to refine kernel quality. One line of research, including Kevin [17], AutoTriton [18], CUDA-L1
[19], and CUDA-L2 [ 20], uses reinforcement learning (RL) or supervised fine-tuning (SFT) to
optimize kernel generation. Alternatively, agentic frameworks such as Astra [ 21], EvoEngineer
[22], and CudaForge [23] employ collaborative role-playing or Coder-Judge architectures to ground
reasoning in hardware specifications. However, these efforts predominantly focus on server-grade
GPUs and CUDA, leaving the distinct constraints and fragmented ecosystems of mobile and edge
computing largely unexplored.
3

Table 1:Comparison between server-side and mobile-side computing.Unlike the server side,
which utilizes unified CUDA-based backends on high-performance GPUs, the mobile side faces a
fragmented landscape with diverse compute backends primarily optimized for inference tasks.
Dimension Server Side Mobile Side
Hardware CPU, GPU, TPU, NPU (ASIC) CPU, GPU, NPU (SoC)
Backend CUDA, TensorRT, ROCm CPU, OpenCL, Vulkan, CoreML, Metal
Language CUDA, Triton, PTX C++, Assembly
Feature Homogeneous Heterogeneous & Fragmented
Frameworks PyTorch, TensorFlow, JAX MNN, NCNN, TFLite, CANN
Workload Training & Inference Inference
Resource Unlimited Limited (Power/Mem/Band)
Table 2:Comparison between KernelBench and MobileKernelBench.Compared to KernelBench,
MobileKernelBench emphasizes operator diversity, covering the majority of common operator types
in ONNX Opset 20. The (PyTorch, ONNX) pairs format facilitates kernel evaluation across different
frameworks, targeting both framework adaptation and optimization on mobile devices.
Feature KernelBench MobileKernelBench (Ours)
Diversity 43 (Level 1) 95
Tasks 250 190
Format PyTorch Models (PyTorch, ONNX) Pairs
Domain GPUs Mobile SoCs (CPU, Adreno, etc.)
Target Optimization ONLY Framework Adaptation & Optimization.
2.2 Mobile Inference Engine
The Open Neural Network Exchange (ONNX) [ 24] serves as the de facto standard for model
interoperability. By defining a unified intermediate representation and operator schema, ONNX
decouples model architecture from specific training environments like PyTorch [25] and TensorFlow
[26]. This standardization is particularly critical for benchmarking, as it establishes a universal
functional definition for operators, ensuring that evaluations focus on implementation capability
rather than framework discrepancies. For on-device execution, bridging the gap between abstract
representation and efficiency remains challenging. While compiler-based stacks like TVM [ 27]
offer automation, library-based inference engines such as MNN [ 10] and NCNN [ 28] are often
preferred in industry for their lightweight integration. Achieving high performance in these libraries
requires meticulous hardware-aware optimizations, including dynamic algorithmic selection and
specialized memory layouts. Consequently, manually implementing operators involves managing
complex low-level details like data packing and register allocation, creating a significant barrier that
motivates the need for automated, expert-level code generation approaches.
3 MobileKernelBench
To bridge the gap between existing server-centric benchmarks and the specialized requirements of
on-device inference, we introduceMobileKernelBench, the first benchmark dedicated to cross-
framework kernel implementation for mobile deployment. As detailed in Tab. 2, our benchmark
differs from previous work by focusing on the ONNX standard and incorporating a mobile kernel
development evaluation pipeline, which verifies the full lifecycle of on-device integration.
3.1 Data Curation
Motivated by the mobile ecosystem’s reliance on ONNX as the standard interchange format, our
benchmark prioritizes comprehensive coverage of the ONNX operator set (Opset). To ensure
compatibility with existing kernel generation benchmarks and standard LLM evaluation protocols,
we encapsulate these operators within a PyTorch-based task format. To construct a usable, diverse,
and robust dataset, we execute a systematic curation pipeline consisting of three stages.
Standard-aligned operator collection.We ground our benchmark in the ONNX Opset version
20 to ensure compatibility with modern inference engines. From the full ONNX operator catalog,
4

ONNX: opset 20
Node: Einsum
Input name: input1, input2
Output name: output
PyTorch
class Module()
def forward():
return torch.einsum()
Node
mapping
Torch
export
Output
verification
× M
Netron
Node comparison
Mobile-
KernelBench
Data case
#Operators: 95
#Tasks: 190
PyTorch
ONNX
Operator
Registration
Framework
Compilation
Model
Verification
Performance
Evaluation
Evaluation paradigm
Schema: name/params
Kernel: cpp/hpp files
Compilation
G++/NDK
V.S.
ONNX
MNN
model
adb
edge
device
EvaluationVerification
MNNV2Basic.out
ModuleBasic.out
Performance
Info. Box
Compile
Correctness
Execution
Evaluation pipeline
Op Repo
Register
(a) MobileKernelBench
Coder
Task:
gen kernel code
Plan:
repair/correct/acc
Debugger
Accelerator
Local/Cross-file error
Execution failure info
Tools
Repo
repo tree/error location
error context/model node
History plan
Info
Repair plan
Correction plan
History plan
execution info
OP performance
History plan
Info
Acceleration plan
History plan
Initial
prompt
Pipeline
Kernel
candidate
× N
Failure
case Best
Kernel
Repair/Correction plan Acceleration plan
plan + code (last iteration)
(b) MoKA
Success
case
ONNX
model
Figure 2:Overview of our proposed framework.The system consists of two core components:(a)
MobileKernelBench, which establishes the evaluation environment by integrating a target-driven
data curation process with an automated, hardware-in-the-loop evaluation pipeline; and(b) MoKA, a
multi-role agentic system where Coder, Debugger, and Accelerator agents collaborate to iteratively
generate and refine kernels based on feedback from the benchmark.
we select operators according to two principles: diversity and generality. To ensure diversity, we
include operators from a wide range of categories to reflect the heterogeneous computation patterns
in neural network inference. To ensure generality, we prioritize operators that are widely used in
practice, including those commonly appearing in canonical neural network architectures and those
already supported by mainstream mobile inference frameworks such as MNN [10] and NCNN [28].
Following these criteria, we select 95 representative operators that capture the core workloads of
on-device inference while keeping the benchmark compact.
Multi-dimensional task expansion.A single operator implementation is often insufficient to
capture the complexity of varying attributes and input configurations. To rigorously evaluate the
generalization capability of LLMs, we expand the 95 selected operators into 190 specific tasks
through a task expansion strategy. Instead of relying on default parameters, we systematically mutate
the PyTorch model definitions to cover diverse code paths and edge cases. Specifically:
• Attribute variation:We modify key attributes that directly affect control-flow behavior. For
example, in reduction operators such as ArgMax and ReduceSum, we vary the keep_dims
parameter and the reduction axis to evaluate the model’s ability to handle output shape
inference and loop reduction logic.
• Dimensionality transformation:We extend input tensors from standard 2D matrices to
lower or higher-dimensional forms. For matrix multiplication operators including MatMul
and Gemm, this requires the generated kernel to correctly handle broadcasting semantics and
batch stride arithmetic, significantly increasing the implementation difficulty.
Target-driven construction strategy.To ensure the expanded tasks are valid and align with de-
ployment standards, we employ a target-driven construction strategy. We actively construct paired
(PyTorch, ONNX) instances as illustrated in Fig. 2(a) and filter them through two criteria:
• Output fidelity:The implemented PyTorch module must yield results identical to the target
ONNX operator. We verify this by cross-referencing the execution of the PyTorch code in
eager mode against the ONNXRuntime 3 execution of the exported model.
• Topology alignment:The PyTorch implementation must be converted to the precise target
ONNX operator node rather than a composite subgraph. We validate this by inspecting the
exported graph topology with Netron 4, iteratively refining the source code until the graph
structure aligns with the canonical ONNX definition.
The resulting benchmark comprises 190 tasks covering 95 distinct operators, taxonomized into 12
categories in Tab. 3. This set spans diverse computational patterns, ranging from memory-bound
element-wise operations to compute-bound contractions like convolutions.
3https://github.com/microsoft/onnxruntime
4https://github.com/lutzroeder/netron
5

Table 3:Overview of MobileKernelBench.This benchmark comprises 190 tasks derived from
95 primitive operators. These operators are classified into 12 categories, encompassing common
operators found in the ONNX ecosystem. A primitive operator may yield multiple distinct tasks
based on differences in input shapes or parameter settings.
Categories Representatives #Operators #Tasks
Unary exp, sign, ceil, floor 11 11
Binary add, div, mod 7 8
Trigonometry sin, acos, atanh, tan 12 12
Activation hardsigmoid, softmax, celu, relu 6 12
Normalization batchnorm, layernorm, instancenorm 3 12
Pooling maxpool, averagepool 4 15
Convolution conv2d, convtranspose, 2 21
Matrix einsum, gemm, matmul, det 4 19
Reduction reducemin, reduceprod, reducesum 10 35
Tensor reshape, concat, topk, tile, slice 19 28
Logic and, bitwisexor, equal 11 13
Others RNN, LSTM, STFT, RoiAlign 4 4
Total 95 190
3.2 Evaluation Pipeline
Evaluating mobile kernels presents a unique challenge: code generation occurs on host machines,
while verification must be executed on resource-constrained edge devices. To address this, we
propose a generic evaluation protocol for mobile kernels, which is instantiated through an automated,
end-to-end pipeline as shown in Fig. 2(a). For more detailed configurations, see Sec. C
Evaluation paradigm.We design a standardized four-stage protocol comprisingOperator Regis-
tration,Framework Compilation,Model Verification, andPerformance Evaluation. This paradigm
explicitly decouples operator implementation from runtime execution. By formalizing this separation,
we ensure the evaluation remains reproducible and accurately simulates the deployment workflow of
real-world mobile applications.
Pipeline instantiation on MNN.We instantiate this paradigm within the MNN framework, au-
tomating the operator lifecycle through four specific stages: (1)Automated registration.Upon
code generation, the pipeline parses the output and executes an injection strategy. It locates the
target source path and hot-swaps the existing implementation with the generated code, ensuring
seamless registration into the global operator factory without manual intervention. (2)Framework
compilation.The pipeline invokes the CMake build system to compile the modified MNN library.
This stage acts as a strict filter for syntactic correctness and API validity, where errors trigger im-
mediate failure termination. (3)Functional verification.Successfully compiled operators undergo
differential testing. We establish a ground truth baseline using the reference ONNX model with
randomized inputs. The pipeline converts the ONNX model to MNN format and compares the
MNN inference output against the baseline, enforcing a strict numerical tolerance for validation. (4)
On-device performance benchmarking.We employ a cross-compilation and remote execution
workflow for real-world efficiency evaluation. The modified source is cross-compiled via the Android
NDK, and the resulting ARM64 binaries are deployed to the target device via a bridge interface. To
ensure statistically robust measurements, the benchmarking executable follows a strict warm-up and
multi-iteration protocol to mitigate system noise.
4 MoKA
We propose the Mobile Kernel Agent (MoKA), a specialized multi-agent framework designed
to automate the lifecycle of operator implementation, debugging, and optimization for on-device
inference engines. As shown in Fig. 2 (b), MoKA follows an iterativeplan-and-executeparadigm. In
each iteration, the agent generates an operator candidate that probes the deployment environment,
while the evaluation pipeline returns structured feedback including compilation status, correctness,
and performance metrics. This feedback loop drives the agents to refine their planning strategies,
enabling progressive convergence toward high-quality, deployment-ready operators.
6

4.1 Agent Collaboration Design
The MoKA architecture decomposes the implementation task into three specialized roles that collabo-
rate via a shared history memory.
Coder.The Coder serves as the sole actuator of the system, responsible for synthesizing C++ source
code. In the initial iteration, it generates a draft implementation based on the task description. In
subsequent steps, it acts as an executor that translates high-level strategies provided by planning
agents into concrete code modifications, ensuring adherence to the specified repair or optimization
logic.Debugger.Activated upon pipeline failures, the Debugger handles two distinct error modes.
For build failures, it initiates aCompilation Diagnosis (Repair Plan)by utilizing repository-aware
tools to interpret compiler diagnostics and retrieve cross-file context, thereby formulating plans to fix
syntactic or dependency errors. For incorrect outputs, it initiates aFunctional Correction (Correction
Plan)by employing model parsing tools to align the implementation with the ONNX definition,
identifying semantic discrepancies to generate functionality-preserving fixes.Accelerator.Once an
operator passes functional verification, the Accelerator pushes performance boundaries. It leverages a
performance parser to extract fine-grained execution metrics such as backend selection and threading
efficiency. Combined with historical data, it proposes anAcceleration Planto optimize memory
access patterns or computational logic without compromising correctness.
Reflective memory.Crucially, both the Debugger and Accelerator utilize a shared history mechanism.
By maintaining a trace of past strategies and their outcomes, the agents perform self-reflection to
avoid repetitive mistakes and prune ineffective optimization paths.
4.2 Agentic Toolset
To ground agent reasoning within the rigid constraints of the deployment environment, we equip
them with two categories of domain-specific tools.
Repository-aware tools.To address the lack of structural awareness in generic LLMs, we implement
aRepository Tree Builderthat efficiently constructs a hierarchical view of the codebase, facilitating
the resolution of dependency errors. Additionally, anError Extractorpowered bytree-sitter-cpp
citetree-sitter2025 parses compiler logs to pinpoint exact error locations and extract surrounding
context. These tools enable the Debugger to effectively distinguish between local syntax errors and
complex cross-file inconsistencies.Information parsing tools.To bridge static graphs and dynamic
execution, aModel Parserserializes both reference ONNX nodes and converted MNN operators
into a unified structured representation, providing evidence for semantic mismatches. Furthermore, a
Performance Parserprocesses raw profiling logs (e.g., backend usage, execution time) into structured
indicators. This assists the Accelerator in identifying bottlenecks, such as suboptimal data layouts or
thread contention, to formulate backend-consistent optimization strategies.
5 Experiments
In this section, we conduct a comprehensive evaluation on MobileKernelBench to assess the per-
formance of LLMs in mobile kernel generation. In Sec. 5.2, we first evaluate leading open-source
and closed-source models accessed directly via cloud service APIs. Furthermore, to investigate the
efficacy of standard fine-tuning strategies for this task, we implement classic LoRA fine-tuning and
GRPO training. Finally, we evaluate the performance of our proposed MoKA in Sec. 5.3.
5.1 Experiment Setups
Evaluation environment.We utilize MNN (v3.2.2 5) as the foundational inference engine, specifi-
cally targeting its CPU backend for operator registration and execution (see Sec. A for registration
details). All evaluations are conducted on a Xiaomi 13 smartphone powered by the Qualcomm
Snapdragon 8 Gen 2 platform [29], a representative high-end mobile SoC equipped with an 8-core
Kryo CPU and LPDDR5X memory.
Evaluation metrics.We assess performance on MobileKernelBench using three metrics: (1)
Compilation success rate (CSR), the percentage of tasks where generated operators successfully
5https://github.com/alibaba/MNN/releases/tag/3.2.2
7

Table 4:Performance comparison of SOTA
LLMs on MobileKernelBench.The best and
second-best results are highlighted inboldand
underlined respectively. Some model names are
abbreviated for layout purposes, with full identi-
fiers provided in Sec. 5.2.
Baseline CSR FCR fast p
(%) (%)0.5 1.0 1.5
Claude-Sonnet-4.5 46.3 34.2 31.1 16.3 4.7
GPT-547.433.2 26.3 13.7 4.2
Gemini-2.5-Flash 20.5 15.8 13.2 6.8 0.5
Llama-3.1-405B 11.6 6.3 5.3 4.2 1.1
DeepSeek-R1 15.3 10.0 8.4 3.2 0.5
Qwen3-235B 18.9 13.7 11.6 6.3 2.1
compile correct fast0.5 fast1.0 fast1.5
Evaluation Pipeline Stages
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5Success Rate
Clause-Sonnet-4.5
GPT-5
Gemini-2.5-Flash
Llama-3.1-405B-Instruct
DeepSeek-R1-0528
Qwen3-235B-A22B-Thinking
Figure 3:Success rate degradation across eval-
uation stages.The plot illustrates the perfor-
mance drop of each model as the evaluation cri-
teria become stricter, from compilation to func-
tional correctness and varying levels of perfor-
mance optimization.
pass the build process. (2)Functional correctness rate (FCR), the proportion of tasks that pass
functional verification against the ONNX baseline. (3)fast p [1], this metric quantifies the percentage
of tasks achieving a speedup greater than a threshold p relative to the native MNN implementation.
For methods that involve iterative refinement or generate multiple candidates, we report metrics based
on the best-performing operator for each task.
LoRA training setups.We fine-tune Qwen-32B via LLaMA-Factory [ 30] using LoRA (rank 64)
and ZeRO stage-3 [31] on 8 A100 GPUs. The model is trained for 2 epochs with a batch size of 1
and gradient accumulation steps of 2. The training dataset follows the Alpaca format, pairing GPT-5
generated descriptions with MNN implementations of 74 ONNX operators. A subset of 20 operators
and 36MobileKernelBenchtasks is held out for testing.
GRPO training setups.We explore RL using GRPO [ 12] implemented via the verl [32] framework,
with Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 as the policy model. OurMobileKernelBenchis partitioned into a
training set of 150 samples and a test set of 40 samples using stratified sampling to ensure a balanced
representation of operator categories. Based on the reward scheme from Kevin [ 17], we add an
intermediate compilation reward to avoid extremely sparse rewards in early training stages. Training
runs on two A100 GPUs for 40 steps, using a global batch size of 30, a learning rate of 1e-6, a group
size of 5, and a context length of 8192 tokens.
5.2 Baseline Evaluation
We benchmark six prevalent LLMs, spanning proprietary leaders (OpenAI GPT-5 [ 2], Anthropic
Claude-Sonnet-4.5 [3], Google Gemini-2.5-Flash [4]) and open-source frontiers (LLaMA-3.1-405B-
Instruct [33], DeepSeek-R1-0528 [ 13], Qwen3-235B-A22B-Thinking-2507 [ 5]). All models are
evaluated using a standardized initial prompt (see Sec. B.1) under default settings via API endpoints.
The quantitative results presented in Tab. 4 and Fig. 3 demonstrate a substantial gap between code
generation capabilities and deployment readiness across all evaluated models. Although leading
proprietary models, such as Claude-Sonnet-4.5 and GPT-5, achieve compilation success rates of
approximately 47%, their performance declines significantly when strict functional verification criteria
are applied. Furthermore, open-source models demonstrate considerably lower proficiency, with
functional correctness rates plateauing between 6.3% and 13.7%, which underscores the complexity
of synthesizing valid operators for low-resource frameworks. The fastp metrics highlight the difficulty
in achieving high-performance optimization. Even for the top-performing Claude-Sonnet-4.5, only
16.3% of the generated operators match or exceed the baseline speed, with just 4.7% realizing a
significant speedup (>1.5× ). These findings substantiate the hypothesis that base large language
models lack the intrinsic ability to discover hardware-efficient implementation strategies in the
absence of external guidance or feedback.
We further dissect model performance across different operator categories, as illustrated in Fig. 4.
For computationally lightweight operations such as activation functions, most models exhibit strong
performance, with Claude-Sonnet-4.5 achieving a functional correctness rate exceeding 70%. In
contrast, complex operators present a prohibitive challenge. Gemini-2.5-Flash and the leading open-
source models fail to produce any functionally correct kernels for convolution tasks. Unexpectedly,
8

Overall Activation Matrix Reduction Convolution T ensor
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage (%)
46.3
91.7
21.1
74.3
33.3
75.0
34.2
75.0
10.5
57.1
23.8
53.6
16.3
25.0
0.0
25.7
14.3
28.6
Claude-Sonnet-4.5
Overall Activation Matrix Reduction Convolution T ensor
47.4
66.7 63.2
71.4
23.8
50.0
33.2
58.3
52.6 54.3
9.5
28.6
13.7
25.0 21.1 25.7
4.8
10.7
GPT-5
Overall Activation Matrix Reduction Convolution T ensor
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage (%)
20.5
41.7
21.1
48.6
0.0
32.1
15.8
33.3
15.8
40.0
0.0
25.0
6.8 8.3
0.0
20.0
0.0
10.7
Gemini-2.5-Flash
Overall Activation Matrix Reduction Convolution T ensor
15.3
58.3
47.4
5.7 4.8
21.4
10.0
50.0
31.6
0.0 4.8
14.3
3.2 8.3
15.8
0.0 0.0 3.6
Deepseek-R1-0528
Overall Activation Matrix Reduction Convolution T ensor
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage (%)
11.6 16.7 15.8 17.1
0.0
21.4
6.3 8.3
0.0
11.4
0.0
17.9
4.2 8.3
0.0 4.7 0.0
14.3
Llama-3.1-405B-Instruct
Overall Activation Matrix Reduction Convolution T ensor
18.9
33.3 31.6
40.0
4.8
25.0
13.7
25.0 26.3
37.1
4.8
14.3
6.3 8.3 10.5
20.0
0.0
7.1
Qwen3-235B-A22B-Thinking
CSR FCR fast1.0
Figure 4:Fine-grained performance of LLMs across different operator categories.We visualize
the evaluation metrics for five representative operator types. The results highlight significant dispari-
ties in model capabilities when handling operators with varying levels of algorithmic complexity.
GPT-5 and DeepSeek-R1-0528 display specific competence in matrix operations, achieving functional
correctness rates of 52.6% and 31.6%, respectively. This observation suggests that these models
may have retained effective algorithmic structures for general matrix multiplication during their
pre-training phases, despite having lower overall performance averages.
Supervised fine-tuning result by LoRA.As shown in Tab. 5, the base Qwen3-32B model demon-
strates limited proficiency in this domain-specific task. Although SFT resulted in marginal improve-
ments, specifically increasing the compilation success rate to 25.0% and correctness to 18.5%, it
failed to yield any gains in the strict fast1.5 efficiency metric. We attribute this limitation primarily
to the inherent data scarcity characterizing mobile operator development. Given the constrained
volume of available training samples, supervised learning proved insufficient for encoding the deep,
framework-specific semantic knowledge required for MNN implementation. In contrast, our MoKA
circumvents this bottleneck by actively retrieving optimization strategies via external tools. This
distinction underscores that for low-resource, expert-domain tasks, an agentic framework capable of
dynamic context retrieval and iterative reasoning constitutes a significantly more robust solution than
static model fine-tuning.
Reinforcement learning result by GRPO.As shown in Tab. 5, the application of GRPO to the
Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 model results in a significant 15.0% improvement in the compilation
success rate, effectively validating that our hierarchical reward design can successfully guide the
model to comply with strict syntactic constraints. However, this method encounters limitations
in terms of functional logic and performance optimization. The functional correctness rate only
increases marginally by 2.5%, and the high-performance metric fast1.0 remains unchanged at 5.0%.
This stagnation indicates that although RL can align the model’s output format, it fails to develop
the complex reasoning skills needed to identify hardware-efficient strategies in smaller models. The
superior performance of our MoKA demonstrates that iterative refinement is significantly more
effective than training-time policy optimization for mobile operator generation.
5.3 MoKA Results
We initialize the MoKA using Claude-Sonnet-4.5 and perform N=10 iterations. To isolate the benefits
of our agentic workflow from simple sampling diversity, we compare it against a pass@10 baseline
where the same model is queried ten times. As shown in Tab. 5, while the pass@10 strategy yields
a moderate improvement over baseline, the MoKA demonstrates superior performance across all
metrics. Specifically, it achieves a functional correctness rate of 75.3%, surpassing the single-query
9

Table 5:Comprehensive performance evaluation on MobileKernelBench.We compare our
proposed MoKA against standard prompting, SFT, and RL methods. CSR and FCR represent
compilation success rate and functional correctness rate, respectively. Bold values indicate the best
performance, and values in parentheses denote the absolute gains over the corresponding baselines.
Method CSR FCR fast p
(%) (%)0.5 1.0 1.5
Supervised Fine-Tuning (SFT)
Qwen3-32B 16.7 13.9 8.3 2.8 0.0
Qwen3-32B-LoRA 25 (+8.3) 18.5 (+5.6) 11.1 (+2.8) 5.6 (+2.8) 0.0 (–)
Reinforcement Learning (RL)
Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507 10.0 5.0 5.0 5.0 0.0
Qwen3-4B-Instruct-2507-GRPO 25.0 (+15.0) 7.5 (+2.5) 7.5 (+2.5) 5.0 (–) 0.0 (–)
Agentic Workflow
Claude-Sonnet-4.5 (Base) 46.3 34.2 31.1 16.3 4.7
Claude-Sonnet-4.5 (@10) 62.1 47.9 41.6 20.5 5.3
MoKA (ours) 93.7(+47.4) 75.3(+41.1) 62.6(+31.5) 46.8(+30.5) 27.4(+22.7)
Overall Activation Binary Convolution Logic Matrix Normalization Pooling ReductionTrigonometry T ensor Unary Others
0
20
40
60
80
100
Percentage (%)
93.7
100 100
61.9
92.3 94.7
100 100 100 100 96.4 100
75.075.3
91.7
75.0
42.9
30.8
78.9
91.7
86.7
100
50.0
78.6
90.9
25.0
46.8
8.3
50.0
23.8
15.4
47.4
75.0
46.7
65.7
33.3
53.6
45.5
25.0
CSR
FCR
fast1.0
Figure 5:Fine-grained performance of MoKA across different operator categories.The agent
demonstrates robust generalization across diverse operator types, achieving high correctness on struc-
turally simpler operations (e.g., activation, normalization) while maintaining competitive performance
on complex tasks like convolution and matrix operations.
and pass@10 baselines by 41.1% and 27.4%, respectively. Most notably, in the speedup evaluation,
the MoKA attains a 27.4% success rate at the challenging fast1.5 threshold, whereas baselines fail to
exceed 6%. This confirms that our iterative feedback loop enables the generation of not only correct
but also highly efficient code.
Fig. 5 further breaks down performance by operator category. The MoKA achieves a 100% compila-
tion success rate in seven categories and yields substantial correctness gains on complex tasks such
as matrix (>7× ) and convolution (nearly 2×). These results indicate that the Debugger effectively
leverages repository context to resolve hallucinations and dependency errors. Moreover, the average
speedup of nearly 3× across successful kernels validates the efficacy of the Accelerator in identifying
hardware-specific optimizations.
6 Conclusion
In this work, we investigate the automation of mobile kernel development using Large Language
Models (LLMs). We introduce MobileKernelBench, a robust system coupled with an automated
pipeline to holistically evaluate compilation success, functional correctness, and on-device perfor-
mance. Our comprehensive evaluation of both off-the-shelf and fine-tuned models reveals that LLMs
struggle with domain-specific mobile implementation, a failure we attribute to the knowledge deficits
caused by ecosystem fragmentation and data scarcity. To bridge this gap, we propose MoKA, a
framework that decomposes kernel refinement into cooperative agents for generation, debugging,
and acceleration. MoKA achieves SOTA results, validating the efficacy of agentic optimization in
this specialized domain. Our findings confirm that with principled methodological design, LLMs
can effectively assist human developers in mobile kernel engineering. Future research directions
include extending these capabilities to low-level optimizations such as multi-threaded NEON and
inline assembly, exploring diverse hardware backends and frameworks beyond MNN, and potentially
automating the generation of entire deployment frameworks.
