record_id: arxiv:2307.07697
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2307.07697
fetched_title: THINK -ON-GRAPH : D EEP AND RESPONSIBLE REASON - ING OF LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL ON KNOWLEDGE GRAPH
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:26Z

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
THINK -ON-GRAPH : D EEP AND RESPONSIBLE REASON -
ING OF LARGE LANGUAGE MODEL ON KNOWLEDGE
GRAPH
Jiashuo Sun21∗†Chengjin Xu1∗Lumingyuan Tang31∗†Saizhuo Wang41∗†
Chen Lin2 Yeyun Gong6 Lionel M. Ni5 Heung-Yeung Shum14 Jian Guo15‡
1IDEA Research, International Digital Economy Academy
2Xiamen University
3University of Southern California
4The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
5The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
6Microsoft Research Asia
ABSTRACT
Although large language models (LLMs) have achieved significant success in vari-
ous tasks, they often struggle with hallucination problems, especially in scenarios
requiring deep and responsible reasoning. These issues could be partially addressed
by introducing external knowledge graphs (KG) in LLM reasoning. In this paper,
we propose a new LLM-KG integrating paradigm “LLM⊗ KG” which treats the
LLM as an agent to interactively explore related entities and relations on KGs
and perform reasoning based on the retrieved knowledge. We further implement
this paradigm by introducing a new approach called Think-on-Graph (ToG), in
which the LLM agent iteratively executes beam search on KG, discovers the most
promising reasoning paths, and returns the most likely reasoning results. We use
a number of well-designed experiments to examine and illustrate the following
advantages of ToG: 1) compared with LLMs, ToG has better deep reasoning power;
2) ToG has the ability of knowledge traceability and knowledge correctability by
leveraging LLMs reasoning and expert feedback; 3) ToG provides a flexible plug-
and-play framework for different LLMs, KGs and prompting strategies without
any additional training cost; 4) the performance of ToG with small LLM models
could exceed large LLM such as GPT-4 in certain scenarios and this reduces the
cost of LLM deployment and application. As a training-free method with lower
computational cost and better generality, ToG achieves overall SOTA in 6 out of
9 datasets where most previous SOTAs rely on additional training. Our code is
publicly available at https://github.com/IDEA-FinAI/ToG.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) (Ouyang et al., 2022; OpenAI, 2023; Thoppilan et al., 2022; Brown
et al., 2020a; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023) have demonstrated remarkable perfor-
mance across various natural language processing tasks. These models capitalize on pre-training
techniques applied to vast text corpora to generate responses that are coherent and contextually
appropriate. Despite their impressive performance, LLMs have substantial limitations when facing
complex knowledge reasoning tasks (Petroni et al., 2021; Talmor et al., 2019; Talmor & Berant, 2018;
Zhang et al., 2023) that require deep and responsible reasoning. Firstly, LLMs usually fail to provide
accurate answers to questions requiring specialized knowledge beyond what was included in the
pre-training phase (out-of-date knowledge in Figure 1a), or to questions requiring long logic chain and
multi-hop knowledge reasoning. Secondly, LLMs lack responsibility, explainability and transparency,
∗Equal contribution.
†Work done during internship at IDEA Research.
‡Corresponding author.
1
arXiv:2307.07697v6 [cs.CL] 24 Mar 2024

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Question：
What is the majority party now in the country where Canberra is located?
(Chain-of-Thought Prompt): Let’s think step by step.
Response: Canberrais the capital of Australia. According to my knowledge up to September 2021the prime minister of Australia is Scott Morrison, who is a
member of the Liberal Party. So the answer should be Liberal Party.
LLM-only
❌
(a)
(Prompt): Please generate a SPARQL query for this
question.
Response: SELECT ?country ?party WHERE {
?canberra dbprop:isLocatedIn ?country .
?country dbprop:majorityParty ?party .
}
Response: Sorry, based on
my query result from the
knowledge base, I cannot
answer your questionsince
I do not have enough
information.
Canberra
Australia
Labor Party
isLocatedIn
majorityParty
[not exist]
Canberra is located in
Australia.
Majority party in Australia is
Not FoundRetrieve Prompt
LLM ⊕KG
❌(b)
Looking for
triples related
to Canberra
The most relevant one is (Canberra,
capital of, Australia). Information not
enough for answering the question.
Looking for triples related to Australia
The most relevant one is (Australia,
prime minister, Anthony Albanese).
I know that Anthony Albanese is from
Labor Party.
Enough information is collected for
answering this question.
Canberra
Australia
Anthony
Albanese
has been leader of
theAustralian Labor
Party(ALP) since
2019 and ……
capital
of
prime minister
The answer is Labor Party
“Think”
On graph On graph LLM-inherent knowledge Conclude
LLM ⊗KG
“Think”
✅
(c)
“Think”
Figure 1: Representative workflow of three LLM reasoning paradigms: (a) LLM-only (e.g., Chain-of-
Thought prompting), (b) LLM⊕ KG (e.g., KBQA via LLM-generated SPARQL query), (c) LLM⊗
KG (e.g., Think-on-Graph).
raising concerns about the risk of hallucinations or toxic texts. Thirdly, the training process for LLMs
is often expensive and time-consuming, making it challenging to keep their knowledge up to date.
Recognizing these challenges, a natural and promising solution is to incorporate external knowledge
such as knowledge graphs (KGs) to help improve LLM reasoning. KGs offer structured, explicit,
and editable representations of knowledge, presenting a complementary strategy to mitigate the
limitations of LLMs (Pan et al., 2023). Researchers (Li et al., 2023c; Xie et al., 2022; Baek et al.,
2023b; Yang et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023a; Jiang et al., 2023) have explored the usage of KGs as
external knowledge sources to mitigate hallucination in LLMs. These approaches follow a routine:
retrieve information from KGs, augment the prompt accordingly, and feed the increased prompt into
LLMs (as illustrated in Figure 1b). In this paper, we refer to this paradigm as “LLM⊕KG”. Although
aiming to integrate the power of LLM and KG, in this paradigm, LLM plays the role of translator
which transfers input questions to machine-understandable command for KG searching and reasoning,
but it does not participate in the graph reasoning process directly. Unfortunately, the loose-coupling
LLM⊕ KG paradigm has its own limitations, and its success depends heavily on the completeness
and high quality of KG. In Figure 1b, for example, although LLM successfully identified necessary
relation types required to answer the question, the absence of the relation “majority party” leads to a
failure in retrieving the correct answer.
Building upon these considerations, we propose a new tight-coupling “LLM⊗ KG” paradigm where
KGs and LLMs work in tandem, complementing each other’s capabilities in each step of graph
reasoning. Figure 1c provides an example illustrating the advantage of LLM⊗ KG. In this example,
the missing relation "majority party" resulting in the failure in Figure 1b can be complemented by
a reference triple (Australia, prime minister, Anthony Albanese) discovered by the LLM agent
with dynamic reasoning ability (Yao et al., 2022), as well as the political party membership of
Anthony Albanese coming from LLM’s inherent knowledge. In this way, the LLM succeeds in
generating the correct answer with reliable knowledge retrieved from KGs. As an implementation of
this paradigm, we propose an algorithmic framework “Think-on-Graph” (meaning: LLMs “Think”
along the reasoning paths “on” knowledge “graph” step-by-step, abbreviated as ToG below), for deep,
responsible, and efficient LLM reasoning. Using the beam search algorithm (Jurafsky & Martin,
2009) in KG/LLM reasoning (Atif et al., 2023; Sun et al., 2023a; Xie et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2024),
ToG allows LLM to dynamically explore a number of reasoning paths in KG and make decisions
accordingly. Given an input question, ToG first identifies initial entities and then iteratively calls the
LLM to retrieve relevant triples from KGs through exploration (looking for relevant triples in KG via
“on graph” step) and reasoning (deciding on the most relevant triples via “think” step) until adequate
2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Question:
What is the majority party now in the country where Canberra is located?
Canberra capital of
country
territory
continent
Australia
part of
Labor Party
Answer
1. Canberra--capital of--Australia --prime minister --Anthony Albanese --political party --Labor Party
2. Canberra--capital of--Australia --prime minister --Anthony Albanese --occupation --Politician
3. Canberra--capital of--Australia --head government--Prime Minister of Australia --officeholder --Anthony AlbaneseGenerate
prime
minister
central bank
...
Anthony
Albanese
head
government
Prime Minister
of Australia
Depth 1
Depth 2
Reasoning paths
Prune
Australia
political party
occupation
Labor Party
officeholder
Politician
citizenship
Depth 3
Anthony
Albanese
Prime Minister of
Australia
Australian Capital
Territory
Canberra
capital of
Australia
Anthony
Albanese
Prime Minister
of Australia
head government office
-
holder
Politician
occupation
Labor Party
Enough Information
Australian Capital
Territory
Australian Capital
Territory
country
country
Not
Enough
Information
Not
Enough
Information
Depth 1 Depth 2
Search
Depth 3
…
territorycontinent
part of
country
prime
minister
continent
central
bank
citizenship
political party
…
continent
0 1.00.50 1.00.50 1.00.5
Reasoning
Search Search
Prune Prune
Reasoning
Reasoning
…
Canberra
Canberra
Figure 2: An example workflow of ToG. The glowing entities are the central entities where the
search starts at each iteration (depth), and the entities with boldface are the selected central entities
for the next iteration after pruning. At each pruning step, the darkness of the edges represents the
ranking score given by LLM, and the dashed lines indicate relations that have been pruned due to low
evaluation scores.
information through the top-N reasoning paths in beam search is gathered to answer the question
(judged by LLMs in "Think" step) or the predefined maximum search depth is reached.
The advantage of ToG can be abbreviated as (1)Deep reasoning: ToG extracts diverse and multi-
hop reasoning paths from KGs as the basis for LLM reasoning, enhancing LLMs’ deep reasoning
capabilities for knowledge-intensive tasks. (2) Responsible reasoning: Explicit, editable reasoning
paths improve the explainability of the reasoning process of LLMs, and enable the tracing and
correction of the provenances of models’ outputs. (3) Flexibility and efficiency: a) ToG is a plug-
and-play framework that can be applied to a variety of LLMs and KGs seamlessly. b) Under ToG
framework, knowledge can be updated frequently via KG instead of LLM whose knowledge-update
is expensive and slow. c) ToG enhances the reasoning ability of small LLMs (e.g., LLAMA2-70B) to
be competitive with big LLMs (e.g., GPT-4).
2 M ETHODS
ToG implements the “LLM⊗ KG” paradigm by asking LLM to perform beam search on knowledge
graph. Specifically, it prompts the LLM to iteratively explore multiple possible reasoning paths on
KGs until the LLM determines that the question can be answered based on the current reasoning
paths. ToG constantly updates and maintains top-N reasoning pathsP ={p1,p 2,...,p N} for the
questionx after each iteration, where N denotes the width of beam search. The entire inference
process of ToG contains the following 3 phases: initialization, exploration, and reasoning.
2.1 T HINK -ON-G RAPH
2.1.1 I NITIALIZATION OF GRAPH SEARCH
Given a question, ToG leverages the underlying LLM to localize the initial entity of the reasoning
paths on knowledge graph. This phase can be regarded as the initialization of the top-N reasoning
pathsP . ToG first prompts LLMs to automatically extract the topic entities in question and gets the
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
top-N topic entitiesE0 ={e0
1,e 0
2,...,e 0
N} to the question. Note that the number of topic entities
might possibly be less thanN.
2.1.2 E XPLORATION
At the beginning of the D-th iteration, each path pn consists of D− 1 triples, i.e., pn =
{(ed
s,n,rd
j,n,ed
o,n)}D−1
d=1 , where ed
s,n and ed
o,n denote subject and object entities, rd
j,n is a specific
relation between them, (ed
s,n,rd
j,n,ed
o,n) and (ed+1
s,n ,rd+1
j,n ,ed+1
o,n ) are connected to each other. The
sets of the tail entities and relations in P are denoted as ED−1 ={eD−1
1 ,eD−1
2 ,...,e D−1
N } and
RD−1 ={rD−1
1 ,rD−1
2 ,...,r D−1
N }, respectively.
The exploration phase in the D-th iteration aims to exploit the LLM to identify the most relevant
top-N entitiesED from the neighboring entities of the current top-N entity setED−1 based on the
questionx and extend the top-N reasoning pathsP withED. To address the complexity of handling
numerous neighboring entities with the LLM, we implement a two-step exploration strategy: first,
exploring significant relations, and then using selected relations to guide entity exploration.
Relation Exploration Relation exploration is a beam search process with the depth of 1 and the
width ofN fromED−1 toRD. The whole process can be decomposed into two steps: Search and
Prune. The LLM serves as an agent to automatically complete this process.
• Search At the beginning of the D-th iteration, the relation exploration phase first searches out
relationsRD
cand,n linked to the tail entity eD−1
n for each reasoning path pn. These relations are
aggregated intoRD
cand. In the case of Figure 2,E1 ={Canberra} andR1
cand denotes the set of all
relations linked to Canberra inwards or outwards. Notably, the Search procedure can be easily
completed by executing two simple pre-defined formal queries shown in Appendix E.1 and E.2,
which makes ToG adapt well to different KGs without any training cost.
• Prune Once we have obtained the candidate relation setsRD
cand and the expanded candidate reason-
ing pathsPcand from the relation search, we can utilize the LLM to select out new top-N reasoning
pathsP ending with the tail relationsRD fromPcand based on the literal information of the ques-
tionx and the candidate relationsRD
cand. The prompt used here can be found in Appendix E.3.1.
As shown in Figure 2, the LLM selects top-3 relations {capital of, country, territory} out
from all relations linked to the entity Canberra in the first iteration. Since Canberra is the
only topic entity, the top-3 candidate reasoning paths are updated as {(Canberra, capital of),
(Canberra, country),(Canberra, territory)}.
Entity Exploration Similar to relationship exploration, entity exploration is also a beam search
process performed by the LLM fromRD toED, and consists of two steps, Search and Prune.
• Search Once we have obtained new top-N reasoning paths P and the set of new tail relations
RD from relation exploration, for each relation path pn∈P , we can explore a candidate entity
setED
cand,n by querying (eD−1
n ,rD
n, ?) or (?,rD
n,eD−1
n ), where eD−1
n ,rn denote the tail entity
and relation of pn. We can aggregate {ED
cand,1,ED
cand,2,...,E D
cand,N} into ED
cand and expand
top-N reasoning pathsP toPcand with the tail entitiesED
cand. For the shown case,E1
cand can be
represented as{Australia, Australia, Australian Capital Territory}.
• Prune Since the entities in each candidate set ED
cand is expressed in natural language, we can
leverage the LLM to select new top-N reasoning paths P ending with the tail entities ED out
from Pcand. The prompt used here can be found in Appendix E.3.2. As shown in Figure 2,
Australia and Australian Capital Territory are scored as 1 since the relations capital of ,
country and territory are only linked to one tail entity respectively, and the current reason-
ing pathsp are updated as{(Canberra, capital of, Australia), (Canberra, country, Australia),
(Canberra, territory, Australian Capital Territory)}.
After executing the two explorations described above, we reconstruct new top-N reasoning pathsP
where the length of each path increases by 1. Each prune step requires at mostN LLM calls.
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
2.1.3 R EASONING
Upon obtaining the current reasoning pathP through the exploration process, we prompt the LLM to
evaluate whether the current reasoning paths are adequate for generating the answer. If the evaluation
yields a positive result, we prompt the LLM to generate the answer using the reasoning paths with
the query as inputs as illustrated in Figure 2. The prompt used for evaluation and generation can be
found in Appendix E.3.3 and E.3.4. Conversely, if the evaluation yields a negative result, we repeat
the Exploration and Reasoning steps until the evaluation is positive or reaches the maximum
search depth Dmax. If the algorithm has not yet concluded, it signifies that even upon reaching
theDmax, ToG remains unable to explore the reasoning paths to resolve the question. In such a
scenario, ToG generates the answer exclusively based on the inherent knowledge in the LLM. The
whole inference process of ToG containsD exploration phases andD evaluation steps as well as a
generation step, which needs at most 2ND +D + 1 calls to the LLM.
2.2 R ELATION -BASED THINK -ON-G RAPH
Previous KBQA methods, particularly based on semantic parsing, have predominantly relied on rela-
tion information in questions to generate formal queries (Lan et al., 2022). Inspired by this, we propose
relation-based ToG (ToG-R) that explores the top-N relation chains{pn = (e0
n,r 1
n,r 2
n,...,r D
n )}N
n=1
starting with the topic entities{e0
n}N
n=1 instead of triple-based reasoning paths. ToG-R sequentially
performs relation search, relation prune and entity search in each iteration, which is the same as ToG.
Then ToG-R performs the reasoning step based on all candidate reasoning paths ending withED
cand
obtained by entity search. If the LLM determines that the retrieved candidate reasoning paths do not
contain enough information for the LLM to answer the question, we randomly sample N entities
from the candidate entitiesED
cand and continue to the next iteration. Assuming that entities in each
entity setED
cand,n probably belong to the same entity class and have similar neighboring relations,
the results of pruning the entity set{ED
cand,n}N
n=1 might have little impact on the following relation
exploration. Thus, we use the random beam search instead of the LLM-constrained beam search in
ToG for entity prune, referred to as random prune. Algorithm 1 and 2 show the implementation
details of the ToG and ToG-R. ToG-R needs at mostND +D + 1 calls to the LLM.
Compared to ToG, ToG-R offers two key benefits: 1) It eliminates the need for the process of pruning
entities using the LLM, thereby reducing the overall cost and reasoning time. 2) ToG-R primarily
emphasizes the literal information of relations, mitigating the risk of misguided reasoning when the
literal information of intermediate entities is missing or unfamiliar to the LLM.
3 E XPERIMENTS
3.1 E XPERIMENTAL DESIGN
3.1.1 D ATASETS AND EVALUATION METRICS
In order to test ToG’s ability on multi-hop knowledge-intensive reasoning tasks, we evaluate ToG
on five KBQA datasets (4 Multi-hop and 1 Single-hop): CWQ (Talmor & Berant, 2018), WebQSP
(Yih et al., 2016), GrailQA (Gu et al., 2021), QALD10-en (Perevalov et al., 2022), Simple Questions
(Bordes et al., 2015). Moreover, in order to examine ToG on more generic tasks, we also prepare
one open-domain QA dataset: WebQuestions (Berant et al., 2013); two slot filling datasets: T-REx
(ElSahar et al., 2018) and Zero-Shot RE (Petroni et al., 2021); and one fact-checking dataset: Creak
(Onoe et al., 2021). Note that, for two big datasets GrailQA and Simple Questions, we only randomly
selected 1,000 samples each for testing in order to save computational cost. For all datasets, exact
match accuracy (Hits@1) is used as our evaluation metric following previous works (Li et al., 2023c;
Baek et al., 2023b; Jiang et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023a).
3.1.2 M ETHODS SELECTED FOR COMPARISON
We compare with standard prompting (IO prompt) (Brown et al., 2020b), Chain-of-Thought prompting
(CoT prompt) (Wei et al., 2022), and Self-Consistency (Wang et al., 2023c) with 6 in-context
exemplars and "step-by-step" reasoning chains. Moreover, for each dataset, we pick previous state-of-
the-art (SOTA) works for comparison. We notice that fine-tuning methods trained specifically on
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Method Multi-Hop KBQA Single-Hop KBQA Open-Domain QA Slot Filling Fact Checking
CWQ WebQSP GrailQA QALD10-en Simple Questions WebQuestions T-REx Zero-Shot RE Creak
Without external knowledge
IO prompt w/ChatGPT 37.6 63.3 29.4 42.0 20.0 48.7 33.6 27.7 89.7
CoT w/ChatGPT 38.8 62.2 28.1 42.9 20.3 48.5 32.0 28.8 90.1
SC w/ChatGPT 45.4 61.1 29.6 45.3 18.9 50.3 41.8 45.4 90.8
With external knowledge
Prior FT SOTA 70.4 α 82.1β 75.4γ 45.4δ 85.8ϵ 56.3ζ 87.7η 74.6θ 88.2ι
Prior Prompting SOTA - 74.4 κ 53.2κ - - - - - -
ToG-R (Ours) w/ChatGPT 58.9 75.8 56.4 48.6 45.4 53.2 75.3 86.5 93.8
ToG (Ours) w/ChatGPT 57.1 76.2 68.7 50.2 53.6 54.5 76.8 88.0 91.2
ToG-R (Ours) w/GPT-4 69.5 81.9 80.3 54.7 58.6 57.1 75.5 86.9 95.4
ToG (Ours) w/GPT-4 67.6 82.6 81.4 53.8 66.7 57.9 77.1 88.3 95.6
Table 1: The ToG results for different datasets. The prior FT (Fine-tuned) and prompting SOTA
include the best-known results: α: Das et al. (2021); β: Yu et al. (2023); γ: Gu et al. (2023); δ:
Santana et al. (2022);ϵ: Baek et al. (2023a);ζ: Kedia et al. (2022);η: Glass et al. (2022);θ: Petroni
et al. (2021);ι: Yu et al. (2022);κ: Li et al. (2023a).
evaluated datasets usually have an advantage by nature over methods based on prompting without
training, but sacrificing the flexibility and generalization on other data. For a fair play, therefore, we
compare with previous SOTA among all prompting-based methods and previous SOTA among all
methods respectively. Note that the paper Tan et al. (2023) is not involved in comparison because its
results are not based on standard exact match and thus incomparable.
3.1.3 E XPERIMENT DETAILS
Method CWQ WebQSP
Fine-tuned
NSM (He et al., 2021) 53.9 74.3
CBR-KBQA (Das et al., 2021) 67.1 -
TIARA (Shu et al., 2022) - 75.2
DeCAF (Yu et al., 2023) 70.4 82.1
Prompting
KD-CoT (Wang et al., 2023b) 50.5 73.7
StructGPT (Jiang et al., 2023) - 72.6
KB-BINDER (Li et al., 2023a) - 74.4
LLama2-70B-Chat
CoT 39.1 57.4
ToG-R 57.6 68.9
ToG 53.6 63.7
Gain (+18.5) (+11.5)
ChatGPT
CoT 38.8 62.2
ToG-R 57.1 75.8
ToG 58.9 76.2
Gain (+20.1) (+14.0)
GPT-4
CoT 46.0 67.3
ToG-R 67.6 81.9
ToG 69.5 82.6
Gain (+23.5) (+15.3)
Table 2: Performances of ToG using different back-
bone models on CWQ and WebQSP.
Given the plug-and-play convenience of ToG,
we try three LLMs in experiments: ChatGPT,
GPT-4 and Llama-2. We use OpenAI API to call
ChatGPT (GPT-3.5-turbo) and GPT-41. Llama-
2-70B-Chat (Touvron et al., 2023) runs with 8
A100-40G without quantization, where the tem-
perature parameter is set to 0.4 for exploration
process (increasing diversity) and set to 0 for rea-
soning process (guaranteeing reproducibility).
The maximum token length for the generation
is set to 256. In all experiments, we set both
widthN and depthDmax to 3 for beam search.
Freebase (Bollacker et al., 2008) is used as KG
for CWQ, WebQSP, GrailQA, Simple Questions,
and Webquestions, and Wikidata (Vrandeˇci´c &
Krötzsch, 2014) is used as KG for QALD10-en,
T-REx, Zero-Shot RE and Creak. We use 5 shots
in ToG-reasoning prompts for all the datasets.
3.2 M AIN RESULTS
3.2.1 C OMPARISON TO OTHER METHODS
Since CoT uses external KG to enhance LLM,
we first compare it with those methods lever-
aging external knowledge as well. As we can
see in Figure 1, even if ToG is a training-free
prompting-based method and has natural disad-
vantage in comparison with those fine-tuning
methods trained with data for evaluation, ToG
with GPT-4 still achieves new SOTA performance in 6 out of 9 datasets, including WebQSP, GrailQA,
1GPT-3.5-turbo and GPT-4 is both fromhttps://openai.com/
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
QALD10-en, WebQuestions, Zero-Shot RE and Creak. Even for some dataset without SOTA, e.g.,
CWQ, the performance of CoT has already been close to SOTA (69.5% v.s. 70.4%). If comparing
with all promoting-based methods, both ToG with GPT-4 and its weaker version ToG with ChatGPT
can win the competition in all datasets. In particular, the improvement of 1.6% on open-domain QA
dataset WebQuestions demonstrates the ToG’s generality on open-domain QA tasks. We also notice
that the performance of ToG on single-hop KBQA dataset is not as good as its performance on other
datasets. These results indicate that ToG is more effective on multi-hop datasets in general, which
supports our argument that ToG enhances the deep reasoning capability of LLMs.
We also see from Figure 1 that, compared with those methods without leveraging external knowledge
(e.g, IO, CoT and SC prompting methods), the advantage of ToG is more significant. For example,
the performance improves 51.8% and 42.9% on GrailQA and Zero-Shot RE, respectively. It turns out
that benefits from external KG can not be ignored in reasoning.
ToG outperforms ToG-R on most datasets since the triple-based reasoning paths provide additional
intermediate entity information compared to the relation chains retrieved by ToG-R. More detailed
analysis of the answers generated by ToG can be checked in Appendix B.2. And the results of
previous methods on each dataset are reported in Appendix C for better comparison,
3.2.2 P ERFORMANCES WITH DIFFERENT BACKBONE MODELS
Given ToG’s flexibility of plug-and-play, we evaluate how different backbone models affect its
performance on two datasets CWQ and WebQSP. Table 2 shows that, as we expected, the performance
of CoT improves with the size (also reflecting partially the reasoning ability) of backbone models
(GPT-4 > ChatGPT > Llama-2). Furthermore, we see that, the larger the backbone model, the larger
the gap between CoT and ToG (the gain increases from 18.5% for Llama-2 to 23.5% for GPT-4
on CWQ, and from 11.5% for Llama-2 to 15.3% for GPT-4 on WebQSP), and this indicates more
potential of KG can be mined using a more powerful LLM.
In addition, even if using the smallest model Llama-2 (70B parameters), ToG outperforms CoT with
GPT-4. This implies a much cheaper technical route for LLM deployment and application, i.e., TOG
with cheap small LLM may be a candidate for substituting expensive big LLM, especially in vertical
scenarios that external KGs can cover.
3.2.3 A BLATION STUDY
We perform various ablation studies to understand the importance of different factors in ToG. We
conduct our ablation studies on two subsets of the test sets of CWQ and WebQSP, each of which
contains 1,000 randomly sampled questions.
Method CWQ WebQSP
CoT 37.6 62.0
ToG
w/ Freebase 58.8 76.2
w/ WikiData 54.9 68.6
ToG-R
w/ Freebase 59.2 75.1
w/ WikiData 51.9 66.7
Table 3: Performances of ToG using
different source KGs on CWQ and We-
bQSP.
Do search depth and width matter for ToG? To ex-
plore the influence of the search depthDmax and the beam
widthN on ToG’s performance, we conduct experiments
under settings with depths ranging from 1 to 4 and widths
from 1 to 4. As shown in Figure 3, ToG’s performance im-
proves with the search depth and width. This also implies
that ToG’s performance could potentially be improved
with the increment of the exploration depth and breadth.
However, considering the computational cost (which in-
creases linearly with the depth), we set both the depth
and width to 3 as the default experimental setting. On
the other hand, the performance growth diminishes when
the depth exceeds 3. This is mainly because only a small
part of questions have the reasoning depths (based on the
number of relations in SPARQL, as seen in Figure 12 in
the Appendix) of greater than 3.
Do different KGs affect ToG’s performance? One of the main advantages of ToG is its plug-and-
play capabilities. As shown in Table 3, ToG achieves significant improvements with different source
KGs on CWQ and WebQSP, compared to CoT. On the other hand, different source KGs might have
7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Figure 3: Performances of ToG with different search depths and widths.
different effects on the performance of ToG. Notably, Freebase brings more significant improvements
on CWQ and WebQSP than Wikidata, since both datasets are constructed upon Freebase. Moreover,
in a very large KG like Wikidata, the searching and pruning processes are relatively challenging.
Method CWQ WebQSP
ToG
w/ Triples 58.8 76.2
w/ Sequences 57.2 73.2
w/ Sentences 58.6 73
ToG-R
w/ Sequences 59.2 75.1
w/ Sentences 50.1 67.3
Table 4: Performances of ToG using dif-
ferent prompting designs.
How do different prompt designs affect ToG? We
perform additional experiments to determine which types
of prompt representations can work well for our approach.
The results are presented in Table 4. "Triples" denotes
using triple formats as prompts to represent multiple paths,
such as "(Canberra, capital of, Australia), (Australia, prime
minister, Anthony Albanese)". "Sequences" refers to the
utilization of a sequence format, as illustrated in Figure 2.
"Sentences" involves converting the triples into natural
language sentences. For example, "(Canberra, capital of,
Australia)" can be converted to "The capital of Canberra
is Australia." The result shows that the utilization of triple-
based representations for the reasoning paths yields the
highest degree of efficiency and superior performance.
Conversely, when considering ToG-R, each reasoning path
is a relation chain starting from a topic entity, rendering it incompatible with the triple-based prompt
representation. Consequently, the transformation of ToG-R into the natural language form results in
excessively lengthy prompts, thereby leading to a notable deterioration in performance.
Method CWQ WebQSP
ToG
w/BM25 51.4 58.7
w/SentenceBERT 51.7 66.3
w/ChatGPT 58.8 76.2
ToG-R
w/BM25 49.4 57.3
w/SentenceBERT 50.1 60.1
w/ChatGPT 59.2 75.1
Table 5: Performances of ToG using dif-
ferent pruning tools.
Comparing the affects from different pruning tools.
Other than the LLM, lightweight models that can mea-
sure text similarity like BM25 and SentenceBERT, can
be employed as pruning tools in the exploration phase.
We can select top-N entities and relations based on their
literal similarities with the question. We investigate the
impacts of different pruning tools on the performance of
the ToG, as demonstrated in Table 5. The replacement of
the LLM with either BM25 or SentenceBERT results in
the significant performance degradation of our approach.
Concretely, the results on CWQ drop on average by 8.4%,
and the results on WebQSP drop on average by 15.1%.
The results show that the LLMs perform best as a pruning
tool in terms of effectiveness. On the other hand, after utilizing the BM25 or SentenceBERT, we
only needD + 1 calls to the LLM instead of 2ND +D + 1 as we discuss in Section 2.1.3, which
enhances the efficiency of ToG.
We conduct additional ablation studies on the effect of the number of seed exemplars and the
difference between ToG and naive beam search on the KG, which can be seen in Appendix B.1.
3.3 K NOWLEDGE TRACEABILITY AND CORRECTABILITY IN TOG
The quality of KG is very important for correct reasoning by ToG. An interesting feature of ToG is
knowledge traceability and knowledge correctability during LLM reasoning, and it provides a way to
improve KG’s quality using ToG itself and reduce the cost of KG construction and correction. As
illustrated in Figure 4, the explicit reasoning paths of the ToGs can be displayed to users. If potential
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Figure 4: The illustration of knowledge traceability and correctability of ToG.
errors or uncertainties in ToG answers are discovered by human users/experts or other LLMs, ToG
has the ability to trace back and examine the reasoning path, find suspicious triples with errors, and
correct them.
Take the case in Figure 4 as an example. Given the input question “What is mascot Phillie Phanatic’s
team’s spring training stadium?”, ToG outputs the wrong answer “Bright House Field” in the first
round. Then ToG traces back all reasoning paths, localizes the cause of the error may come from the
second reasoning path (Phillie Phanatic
Team
−−−→Philadelphia Phillies
Arena Stadium
−−−−−−−→Bright House Field),
and analyzes that the error comes from the old name “Specturm Field” of “Bright House Field” in
the outdated triple (Philadelphia Phillies, Arena Stadium, Bright House Field). According to the
hints from ToG, user can ask LLM to correct this error and answer the same question with correct
information. This example reveals that ToG not only enhances LLM with KG, but also improves the
quality of KG with LLM, known as knowledge infusion (Moiseev et al., 2022).
4 R ELATED WORK
Reasoning with LLM Prompting Chain-of-Thought (CoT) (Wei et al., 2022) has been shown to be
effective in enhancing LLM reasoning. It creates a series of prompt instances according to reasoning
logic under a few-shot learning paradigm in order to improve LLM’s performance on complex tasks.
The thought of CoT has been improved along different dimensions, including Auto-CoT (Zhang
et al., 2022), Complex-CoT (Fu et al., 2023), Self-Consistency (Wang et al., 2023c), Zero-Shot-CoT
(Kojima et al., 2022), Iter-CoT (Sun et al., 2023b), ToT (Yao et al., 2023), GoT (Besta et al., 2023)
and so on. Given the limitation that all these works only use the knowledge in training data, recent
efforts such as ReAct (Yao et al., 2022) attempt to utilize the information from external sources such
as Wiki documents to further improve the reasoning performance.
KG-enhanced LLM KG has advantages in dynamic, explicit, and structured knowledge repre-
sentation (Pan et al., 2023) and techniques combining LLMs with KGs have been studied. Early
studies (Peters et al., 2019; Huang et al., 2024; Luo et al., 2024; Zhang et al., 2021; Li et al., 2023b;
Liu et al., 2020) embed structured knowledge from KGs into the underlying neural networks during
the pretraining or fine-tuning process. However, KG embedded in LLM sacrifices its own nature of
explainability in knowledge reasoning and efficiency in knowledge updating (Hu et al., 2023).
Recent works instead combine LLMs with KGs by translating relevant structured knowledge from
KGs to textual prompts for LLMs. All the methods follow a fixed pipeline that retrieves extra
information from KGs to augment the LLM prompt and they belong to the LLM⊕ KG paradigm we
defined in the introduction section. On the other hand, Jiang et al. (2023) asks LLM to explore KG
and so it can be regarded as a special case of ToG, which belongs to the LLM⊗ KG paradigms.
9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
5 C ONCLUSION
We introduce the LLM⊗ KG paradigm for integrating LLMs and KGs in a tight-coupling manner,
and propose the Think-on-Graph (ToG) algorithmic framework which leverages LLM as a agent
participating in KG reasoning for better decision-making. Experimental results demonstrate that ToG
outperforms existing fine-tuning-based methods and prompting-based methods without additional
training cost and mitigates the hallucination issue of LLMs.
6 A CKNOWLEDGEMENT
We express our sincere gratitude to the esteemed reviewers for their invaluable feedback and con-
structive comments, which significantly contributed to the improvement and refinement of this paper.
Their insightful suggestions and meticulous attention to detail have played a pivotal role in enhancing
the quality and clarity of our research work.
