record_id: arxiv:2511.22074
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2511.22074
fetched_title: Real-Time Procedural Learning From Experience for AI Agents
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:27Z

Real-Time Procedural Learning From Experience for AI Agents
DASHENG BI∗,Altrina, USA
YUBIN HU∗,Altrina, USA
MOHAMMED N. NASIR,Altrina, USA
Learning how to do things from trial and error in real time is a hallmark of biological intelligence, yet most LLM-based agents lack
mechanisms to acquire procedural knowledge after deployment. We propose Procedural Recall for Agents with eXperiences Indexed
by State (PRAXIS), a lightweight post-training learning mechanism that stores the consequences of actions and retrieves them by
jointly matching environmental and internal states of past episodes to the current state. PRAXIS augments agentic action selection
with retrieved state-action-result exemplars that are generated in real time. When evaluated on the REAL web browsing benchmark,
PRAXIS improves task completion accuracy, reliability, and cost efficiency across different foundation model backbones, and shows
preliminary generalization to unseen tasks in similar environments. These results demonstrate that PRAXIS enables the practical
adoption of AI agents in fast-evolving stateful environments by helping them learn new procedures effectively.
1 Introduction
1.1 AI Agents and Procedural Learning
AI agents are artificial intelligence systems capable of observing and taking actions in an environment. As adoption
spreads across industries, there is a growing need for AI agents to quickly learn domain- or user-specific information.
There are two main classes of information that agents are typically expected to learn:
(1) Facts: atomic pieces of information independent of the state of the agent or environment (e.g., a user’s name,
preferences, organizational charts). Facts can change over time, but at any given moment they are generally
context-independent.
(2) Procedures: established conventions for doing things (e.g., "how to troubleshoot a failed login" or "how to
guide a customer through a sales process to the most fitting product"). Procedures can be viewed as a sequence
of state-dependent requirements or preferences over actions.
In real-world applications, learning and optimizing procedures in real time are at least as important as learning facts.
While frameworks such as Mem0 [4] and Letta [12] focus on long-termfactualmemory, effective post-training learning
ofproceduresin AI agents remains relatively underexplored.
A naïve approach isa prioriprocedural specification: a human writes rules or standard operating procedures (SOPs)
that are included in the agent’s context at inference time. This approach effectively reduces procedures to a large
bundle of facts. In practice, this approach faces challenges because (1) many procedures are not fully documented,
as humans are often trained by observation rather than by reading long SOPs; (2) enumerating all states and edge
cases in a combinatorial space is difficult; and (3) procedures can become obsolete quickly as environments change. We
argue that a more robust approach is to learn proceduresa posteriorifrom demonstrations or experience. Inspired by
state-dependent memory in psychology [3, 14], we propose PRAXIS, a concrete method for procedural recall and show
that it improves agent accuracy, reliability, and efficiency in web browsing settings. Our method is compatible with
both experiences demonstrated by a human expert and actual trajectories generated by the AI agent itself.
∗Both authors contributed equally to this research.
Authors’ Contact Information: Dasheng Bi, dbi@altrina.com, Altrina, Menlo Park, California, USA; Yubin Hu, harvey@altrina.com, Altrina, Menlo Park,
California, USA; Mohammed N. Nasir, mo@altrina.com, Altrina, Menlo Park, California, USA.
1
arXiv:2511.22074v2 [cs.AI] 2 Dec 2025

2 Bi, Hu, and Nasir
1.2 Web Agents and the Browser Environment
Human-facing web applications almost always require multi-step interactions to accomplish meaningful goals (e.g.,
purchasing an item online requires searching, filtering, logging in, completing forms, and checking out)—a procedure.
Moreover, these procedures must also adapt to changing environments (e.g., an e-commerce site may have seasonal
pop-ups or redesigned interfaces), making web browsing a natural environment to studya posterioriprocedural learning.
Importantly, even when tasks are obvious to humans, comprehensive procedures are rarely documented, and high
personalization limits pretraining coverage in foundation models. As AI-based design tools increasingly generate and
update web platforms, the economic value shifts to novel, previously unseen interfaces and interaction flows, pushing
agents into out-of-distribution states and renderinga prioriSOPs brittle. A post-training, state-indexed procedural
memory thus becomes essential for robust web automation, allowing agents to acquire and reuse procedures precisely
when new states appear.
2 Related Work
External Memory for AI Chatbots.A broad class of systems augment LLMs with non-parametric memory in the
conversational environment. Retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) attaches a document store to provide factual
knowledge at inference time [8]. In agentic settings, persistent memory frameworks such as Letta (formerly MemGPT)
[12] provide hierarchical storage and dynamic context management. Mem0 [ 4] provides a queryable, cross-session
memory for user preferences and long-range conversational context. Academic frameworks include MemoryBank [19]
which mimics human long-term memory with continual decay and reinforcement, and A-MEM [16] which dynamically
links and evolves structured notes. These approaches typically focus on factual memory for agents in conversational
environments. In contrast, our method focuses on learning action policies in stateful visual environments that are
significantly more complex and not entirely observable like the web environment.
Experience-Based Self-Improvement and Workflow Memories.A complementary line of work improves agents via
self-reflection. Reflexion [13] maintains verbal reflections in an episodic buffer to guide subsequent trials; Self-Refine
[10] iteratively critiques and edits its own outputs; and CLIN [11] performs continual task adaptation with a persistent
textual memory of causal abstractions. These methods are effective but are not well-tested in visual environments and
generally do not encode information of environmental state. There has also been a line of work on experience- or
workflow-based memories for agents. Agent Workflow Memory [15], Synapse [18], and ExpeL [17] induce abstracted,
natural language workflows from successful trajectories and retrieve them to augment prompts at test time. In contrast,
our method performs local state-based recall that is grounded primarily in the live environment state, a factor not present
in prior works, and secondarily to the goal. Moreover, we index memories with explicit state and action descriptors,
rather than high-level trajectories, enabling precise recall and learning of minute details required for environments like
the web.
3 Methods
3.1 Altrina Agent
The experiments in this study were conducted with Altrina1, a frontier AI agent operating in computer use environments.
Altrina is capable of perceiving the environment both visually and as compressed textual information, taking actions
1The agent system described in this work was previously known as Tessa in prior publications [1, 2].

Real-Time Procedural Learning From Experience for AI Agents 3
like a human on a computer, and executing complex directives end-to-end. While Altrina’s capabilities extend beyond
acting in the browser, we restrict the action space to web-related actions for this study. In the browser environment,
we previously showed that the baseline Altrina agent achieves state-of-the-art results on multiple benchmarks [1, 2],
including WebVoyager [7] and REAL [6].
Altrina’s scaffolding layer orchestrates underlying foundational models with a "node-based" architecture. Each node
is designed for a specific function in the agentic loop. In this study, we modify theaction selection node, which is
responsible for deciding what the next agent action should be given the current state and progress towards the task
objective, by adding a dedicatedprocedural memorysection to its context.
3.2 State-Dependent Memory
Mirroring state-dependent memory in psychology, which finds improved recall when internal state and external context
at retrieval match those present during encoding [3, 14], we designed a state-dependent memory for Altrina in which
indexing and retrieval are based on the browser’s environment state and the agent’s internal state.
Each memory entry contains the following components:
(1)𝑀 env-pre
𝑖 , a description of the environmental state in which this memory is generated
(2)𝑀 int
𝑖 , the internal state of the agent at the time of the experience, including the overall directive the agent is
trying to achieve
(3)𝑎 𝑖, the action taken at the time
(4)𝑀 env-post
𝑖 , the state of the environment after the action was taken
Formally, we use the following procedure (Alg. 1) to retrieve a set of memories that may be informative to the agent:
Algorithm 1:Procedural Memory Retrieval
Input: Memory environment states{𝑀 env
𝑖 }𝑛
𝑖=1, query environment state𝑄env, memory internal states{𝑀 int
𝑖 }𝑛
𝑖=1,
query internal state𝑄 int, internal state embedding function𝑓, search breadth𝑘, similarity threshold𝜏
Output:Retrieved memory indicesR
for𝑖←1to𝑛do
𝑣𝑖←IoU(𝑀 env
𝑖 ,𝑄 env);
ℓ𝑚←|𝑀 env
𝑖 |, ℓ𝑞←|𝑄 env|;
𝑙𝑖←LengthOverlap(ℓ 𝑚,ℓ 𝑞)=1− |ℓ𝑚−ℓ 𝑞|
max(ℓ𝑚,ℓ 𝑞) ;
𝑠env
𝑖 ←𝑣 𝑖·𝑙 𝑖;
𝑠int
𝑖 ←

𝑓(𝑀 int
𝑖 ),𝑓(𝑄 int)

;
Renv←TopkIndices(𝑠 env,𝑘);
eR←Sorted(R env;key=𝑖↦→𝑠 int
𝑖 ;descending);
R←[𝑖∈ eR|𝑠 env
𝑖 ≥𝜏];
returnR;
3.3 Benchmark
A number of benchmarks exist to evaluate the performance of AI agents. MiniWoB/MiniWoB++ target short-horizon
GUI primitives [9]; Mind2Web and WebVoyager target relatively straightforward workflows on live websites [5, 7];
WebArena hosts replicas of a few websites for local testing of relatively simple tasks with text-based evaluations [20].

4 Bi, Hu, and Nasir
To ensure reproducible evaluation on tasks of real-world relevance, we evaluate on deterministic clones of functional
websites using the REAL benchmark [6]. REAL provides replicas of 11 commonly used sites and 112 everyday tasks of
varying complexity, along with both programmatic state checks for action tasks and rubric-guided natural language
evaluations for information retrieval tasks. Prior benchmarking reports that frontier models with naïve scaffolding
achieve at most∼41%success, leaving substantial room for post-training procedural learning.
4 Results
4.1 Procedural memory improves agent accuracy
We benchmarked Altrina on REAL using several VLM backbones for each of the agentic compute nodes, either with or
without access to procedural memory (Fig. 1). Procedural memory consistently improved the performance of Altrina
(average performance across models increased from40.3%to44.1%, mean accuracy over five repetitions).
20%
30%
40%
50%
60%
Llama 4 Qwen3-VL Gemini 2.5 Flash GPT-5 Claude Sonnet 4.5
25.2
28.9
37.1
40.7 42.0
48.6
45.9
49.3
51.2
53.2
Fig. 1. Performance on REAL benchmark for different models with (blue) and without (grey) procedural memory.
We also measured the best-of-5 accuracy (Table 1), which reflects the agent’s capability frontier under repeated
attempts. Procedural memory also improved best-of-5 accuracy (average across models from53.7%to55 .7%). Together,
these results suggest that retrieved procedural memory traces provide reusable priors that improve agentic behavior on
complex tasks, and that such memory traces may be generalized across similar tasks, supporting the completion of
novel tasks.
Table 1. Best-of-5 accuracy over tasks.
Model No PM With PM
Llama 4 47.352.7
Qwen3-VL 44.647.3
Gemini 2.5 Flash 59.861.6
GPT-5 56.257.1
Claude Sonnet 4.560.759.8

Real-Time Procedural Learning From Experience for AI Agents 5
4.2 Procedural memory improves agent reliability
We definereliabilityas the mean success rate over five repetitions of a task, averaged over all tasks in REAL having at
least one successful run over the five repetitions. Procedural memory improved the reliability of Altrina from74.5%to
79.0%averaged across all models (Fig. 2). These results suggest that retrieved procedural memory traces can suppress
unwanted stochastic variance in the underlying vision-language models by biasing their decisions towards previously
successful trajectories under similar states, thereby improving the reliability and repeatability of the high-level agentic
behavior.
50%
60%
70%
80%
90%
Llama 4 Gemini 2.5 Flash Qwen3-VL GPT-5 Claude Sonnet 4.5
53.2 54.9
70.1
78.8
83.2
86.0
81.6
86.2
84.4
89.0
Fig. 2. Agent reliability on REAL benchmark for different models with (blue) and without (grey) procedural memory.
4.3 Procedural memory improves agent efficiency
We measureefficiencyas the average number of steps taken on tasks in REAL with at least one successful run across
five repetitions. Procedural memory reduces steps-to-completion on average from25.2to20 .2across models (Table 2).
This indicates that procedural memory recall effectively steers agentic behavior along both correct and more direct
trajectories.
Table 2. Average number of steps to complete task.
Model Base With PM
Llama 4 19.816.2
Qwen3-VL 27.720.8
Gemini 2.5 Flash 28.922.3
GPT-5 24.220.7
Claude Sonnet 4.5 25.221.0
4.4 Procedural memory performance scales with retrieval breadth
We ablated the retrieval breadth hyperparameter𝑘 in Alg. 1 to study its effect on the performance of procedural memory
(Fig. 3). Due to resource limitations, we only tested the effects of this ablation on the agent with a Gemini 2.5 Flash

6 Bi, Hu, and Nasir
backbone. We found that performance generally increased in steps as we broadened our retrieval breadth, with slight
decreases within each step, and converged to a plateau, suggesting that while there exists some local context crowding,
procedural memory offers increasingly helpful and generalizable context to the language model at a larger scale.
0 2 4 6 8 10
Recall Breadth40%
42%
44%
46%
48%
50%
52%
Fig. 3. Performance as a function of retrieval breadth.
5 Discussion
Personalized learning as a critical component of AI agents in the economy.We envision a future where, instead of
replacing humans, AI agents work alongside them. To encompass the diverse activities across our economy and maintain
high collaboration efficiency, users will need to customize their AI agent with their own data and procedures. Even if it
becomes possible to quickly and efficiently train everything into a single, universal model, we may not wish to, as each
user should be able to decide whether to share their private knowledge with the world. In this context, personalized
learning methods like PRAXIS that customize agents, not only on a superficial level, but also in terms of real capabilities,
will be critical to the adoption of agents in the economy.
Summary of contributions.This paper introducesstate-dependent memory, ana posteriorilearning mechanism that
stores local interaction traces and retrieves them by jointly matching theenvironment stateand the agent’sinternal
objective. When tested as an integration into the Altrina web agent, our method yields consistent improvements on the
REAL web browsing benchmark across diverse VLM backbones: higher average accuracy, higher best-of-5 accuracy,
better reliability, and fewer steps to completion. An ablation shows increased gains with retrieval breadth𝑘. Together,
our results indicate that state-dependent memory provides reusable local state-to-action priors that guide AI agents
towards robust, generalizable behavior.
Future directions. Beyond web environments.State-dependent memory is conceptually agnostic to the environment,
and the same idea can be naturally extended to general cases of agentic computer use.Richer state encoding.Our
proof-of-concept implementation of state-dependent memory uses basic visual and DOM feature overlap along with
simple similarity metrics. A richer encoder can improve both retrieval quality and invariance to superficial changes.

Real-Time Procedural Learning From Experience for AI Agents 7
Adaptive retrieval mechanisms.Rather than a fixed retrieval based on state similarity heuristics, the retrieval mechanism
can account for real-time factors such as uncertainty and compute budget. For highly uncertain scenarios, retrieval
can also be iterative to improve quality.From action agents to alignment agentsWhile the training signal in this paper
is objective task success or failure, PRAXIS can use user preference as a training signal in cases where no objective
standard exists. This would be accomplished by observing the user’s inputs and feedback over time, steering the actions
accordingly at each iteration, and converging to a procedural memory that encodes the user’s preferences for how a
task is done.
