record_id: arxiv:2605.16233
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.16233
fetched_title: FORGE: Self-Evolving Agent Memory With No Weight Updates via Population Broadcast
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T18:59:56Z

FORGE: Self-Evolving Agent Memory With No Weight Updates
via Population Broadcast
Igor Bogdanov
igorbogdanov@cmail.carleton.ca
Carleton University
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
Chung-Horng Lung
chlung@sce.carleton.ca
Carleton University
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
Thomas Kunz
tkunz@sce.carleton.ca
Carleton University
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
Jie Gao
jie.gao6@carleton.ca
Carleton University
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
Adrian Taylor
Adrian.Taylor@forces.gc.ca
Defence R&D Canada
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
Marzia Zaman
Marzia@cistel.com
Cistel Technology
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada
Abstract
Can LLM agents improve decision-making through self-generated
memory without gradient updates? We propose FORGE (Failure-
Optimized Reflective Graduation and Evolution), a staged, population-
based protocol that evolves prompt-injected natural-language mem-
ory for hierarchical ReAct agents. FORGE wraps a Reflexion-style
inner loop, where a dedicated reflection agent (using the same un-
derlying LLM, no distillation from a stronger model) converts failed
trajectories into reusable knowledge artifacts: textual heuristics
(Rules), few-shot demonstrations (Examples), or both (Mixed),
with an outer loop that propagates the best-performing instance’s
memory to the population between stages and freezes converged in-
stances via a graduation criterion. We evaluate on CybORG CAGE-2,
a stochastic network-defense POMDP at a 30-step horizon against
the B_line attacker, where all four tested LLM families (Gemini-
2.5-Flash-Lite, Grok-4-Fast, Llama-4-Maverick, Qwen3-235B) ex-
hibit strongly negative, heavy-tailed zero-shot rewards. Compared
against both a zero-shot baseline and a Reflexion baseline (isolated
single-stream learning), FORGE improves average evaluation re-
turn by 1.7-7.7× over zero-shot and by 29-72% over Reflexion in all
12 model-representation conditions, reducing major-failure rates
(below−100) to as low as∼1%. We find that (1) population broadcast
is the critical mechanism, with a no-graduation ablation confirming
that broadcast carries the performance gains while graduation pri-
marily saves compute; (2)Examplesachieves the strongest returns
for three of four models, whileRulesoffers the best cost-reliability
profile with∼40% fewer tokens; and (3) weaker baseline models
benefit disproportionately, suggesting FORGE may mitigate capabil-
ity gaps rather than amplify strong models. All evidence is confined
to CAGE-2 B_line; cross-family findings are directional evidence.
CCS Concepts
•Computing methodologies → Artificial intelligence;Multi-
agent systems;Intelligent agents;Partially-observable Markov
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for third-party components of this work must be honored.
For all other uses, contact the owner/author(s).
ACM CAIS ’26, San Jose, CA, USA
©2026 Copyright held by the owner/author(s).
ACM ISBN 979-8-4007-2415-2/26/05
https://doi.org/10.1145/3786335.3813155
decision processes;Reinforcement learning;Planning and
scheduling;Natural language processing.
Keywords
LLM agents, self-improvement, memory evolution, population-
based training, prompt-only learning, cyber defense, POMDP
ACM Reference Format:
Igor Bogdanov, Chung-Horng Lung, Thomas Kunz, Jie Gao, Adrian Taylor,
and Marzia Zaman. 2026. FORGE: Self-Evolving Agent Memory With No
Weight Updates via Population Broadcast. InACM Conference on AI and
Agentic Systems (ACM CAIS ’26), May 26–29, 2026, San Jose, CA, USA.ACM,
New York, NY, USA, 19 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3786335.3813155
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) can act as general-purpose reasoning
engines for sequential decision-making with ability to self-reflect
and improve when embedded in agentic scaffolds such as ReAct
[23], Reflexion [15], and Voyager [20]. Yet most such agents remain
single-episode systems: they reason and act within an episode, but
retain little actionable knowledge that reliably improves future be-
havior. This gap is especially problematic in stochastic, partially ob-
servable environments where policies must be discovered through
repeated interactions rather than specified in advance.
Since fine-tuning is often infeasible and expensive, prompt-only
self-improvement offers a promising alternative. However, three
critical questions remain for applying this to stochastic, long-horizon
sequential decision-making: (1)What should be remembered?
Existing approaches typically commit to a single representation
(heuristics/rules or behavior examples) without controlled compari-
son. (2)How should memory propagate?Unlike serial reflection,
population-based training suggests parallel exploration could ac-
celerate learning, but its prompt-only analogue is underexplored.
(3)Is the training method transferable across LLMs?Whether
gradient-free evolution yields consistent gains across diverse model
families remains an open empirical question.
We address these questions via FORGE, astaged population
protocolwhere 𝑁 hierarchical ReAct agents evolve prompt-injected
memory over𝑆 stages. We evaluate four model families (Gemini-
2.5-Flash-Lite, Grok-4-Fast, Llama-4-Maverick, Qwen3-235B) under
three conditions: zero-shot, Reflexion [15] (isolated single-stream
learning), and FORGE (Reflexion plus population broadcast and
arXiv:2605.16233v1 [cs.AI] 15 May 2026

ACM CAIS ’26, May 26–29, 2026, San Jose, CA, USA Bogdanov et al.
graduation), comparing three memory representations across mul-
tiple independent sessions per model.
We study this challenge in CybORG CAGE-2 [8], a stochastic
cyber-defense POMDP that combines four properties making it a
demanding stress test for prompt-only adaptation: (1) a long hori-
zon (30 steps) with partial observability, where LLM-based defense
remains underexplored; (2) near-catastrophic zero-shot LLM per-
formance, so memory-based learning is genuinely necessary; (3)
scalar per-step reward with no natural-language feedback, requir-
ing the agent to infer from numerical signals alone what went
wrong; and (4) a practically important domain with a public leader-
board (DRL top score−3.47[ 8]) providing absolute reference points.
In this setting, a ReAct agent based on four contemporary LLM
families without any environment knowledge displays deeply neg-
ative zero-shot returns. All evidence in this paper is confined to
CAGE-2 B_line red agent at a 30-step horizon; generalization to
other attacker types and environments remains future work.
Contributions.Our main contributions are: (1)A population-
based, gradient-free self-improvement protocol, FORGE. The
protocol evolves prompt-injected natural-language memory through
staged learning with champion broadcast and graduation-based
early stopping. We compare three conditions – zero-shot, Reflex-
ion (isolated reflection, no broadcast), and FORGE – and observe
1.7–7.7× improvements in average returns over zero-shot, with the
single best observed checkpoint return reaching−3.60(against a
maximum of0and a DRL top score of −3.47); (2)A controlled
comparison of memory representations in a stochastic long-
horizon environment.Rules,Examples, andMixedrepresenta-
tions reach comparable final performance in the replicated Gemini
study, withExamplesachieving the best return (−24.5) andRules
offering the best cost-reliability profile with higher graduation
rates and∼40% fewer tokens thanExamples; (3)Evidence that
population-level transfer is critical.Champion broadcast im-
proves performance by 29–72% over the Reflexion baseline in all 12
model-representation conditions and reduces catastrophic-failure
rates to as low as ∼1%; and (4)Directional cross-family evi-
dence.FORGE improves over both zero-shot and Reflexion for all
four tested model families, with disproportionately higher gains on
weaker baselines.
2 Related Work
Prompt-Only Self-Improvement & Baseline Selection.A growing
body of literature explores replacing weight updates with linguis-
tic feedback. Reflexion [ 15] stores critiques after failures, while
Self-Refine [9] applies iterative critiques within a single response.
CLIN [10] extends prompt-only self-improvement to cross-episode
causal-memory abstractions. Recent work on context evolution and
test-time adaptation highlights that unconstrained self-edits can
accumulate errors, motivating mechanisms that select and propa-
gate only robust improvements across trials [17, 25]. TextGrad [24]
takes a complementary approach, performing gradient descent over
text representations using LLM-generated feedback as the optimiza-
tion signal. Voyager [20] and ExpeL [ 26] learn reusable skills or
experience from successful episodes. Among these, Reflexion is the
directly comparable baseline in our setting: it requires only a scalar
success/failure indicator, applies failure-triggered verbal memory
updates, and needs no task-specific engineering to operate with
CAGE-2’s per-step reward signal. The remaining methods would
each require nontrivial adaptation: Voyager and ExpeL depend on
reusable successes, scarce at CAGE-2 initialization where zero-shot
performance is near-catastrophic; CLIN is built for structured text-
simulator feedback rather than scalar per-step reward; Dynamic
Cheatsheet [17] and ACE [25] use update regimes that differ from
scalar per-step cyber-defense reward; and TextGrad would require
an auxiliary evaluator to convert environment reward into the tex-
tual optimization signal it expects (it is the most tractable future
comparison). We therefore adopt Reflexion as the primary baseline
and compare it against FORGE under identical model, memory
representation, and training budget.
Memory Representations.How to efficiently represent the knowl-
edge that an agent should remember still remains an open question.
Systems like AutoGuide [5], ExpeL [26], and Voyager [20] demon-
strate the value of learning guidelines, experience, or skills repre-
sented by executable code. Complementary systems treat memory
as a managed context resource or workflow artifact, e.g., MemGPT
[12], Agent Workflow Memory [21], and Dynamic Cheatsheet [17],
but they rarely provide controlled comparisons of representation
choices under identical training dynamics. While prior work com-
pares instructions vs. exemplars in single-step tasks [19] or even
sequential decision-making [14], we extend artifact efficiency com-
parison to adversarial POMDPs, evaluatingRules,Examples, and
Mixedrepresentations under identical staged learning conditions.
Population-Based Selection.Population-Based Training (PBT) [ 7]
is a canonical strategy for parallel exploration. Unlike classic hyper-
parameter PBT, our population mechanism selects among textual
artifacts that shape the agent’s policy via prompting. Whereas
prompt-evolution methods typically optimize a single monolithic
prompt and focus on single-step tasks [4, 6, 22], we evolve struc-
tured lists of rules or examples, tied to specific failure modes, en-
abling targeted repairs without damaging unrelated competencies.
Cyber Defense Agents.CybORG [ 16] and the CAGE-2 challenge
[8] provide a rigorous SOTA testbed currently dominated by rein-
forcement learning (RL) methods. Prior LLM-based cyber defenders
are often evaluated either as fixed-prompt policies in CAGE-2 [11]
or in later CybORG variants (e.g., CAGE 4) as components within
hybrid multi-agent systems [3]. Our work demonstrates that LLM
agents can improve their defense policies online without gradient
updates.
Positioning.Our work combines three separate directions: (1)
gradient-free self-improvement, (2) memory representation, and
(3) population-based selection into a coherent protocol. Unlike
memory-centric architectures that store complete records of agen-
tic behavior [13], FORGE performs explicit trajectory analysis to
update structured knowledge artifacts for specialized sub-agents,
aligning with modular agent design patterns [18]. Our approach
builds a Reflexion-inspired [15] inner loop on ReAct [23] scaffold-
ing and wraps it with population-level selection and broadcast
for hierarchical agents in an adversarial, stochastic cyber-defense
POMDP.

FORGE: Self-Evolving Agent Memory With No Weight Updates ACM CAIS ’26, May 26–29, 2026, San Jose, CA, USA
Figure 1: System Overview. (Left) Hierarchical ReAct agent with dynamic memory injection. (Right) Reflexion learning
loop: upon a reward below threshold, a dedicated Reflector or Exemplifier agent analyzes the full trajectory and synthesizes
knowledge artifacts that are injected back into the agent’s memory.
3 Method
We introduce FORGE (Failure-Optimized Reflective Graduation and
Evolution), a multi-stage population protocol for evolving prompt-
injected memory without weight updates. The method has three
components: (1) a hierarchical ReAct agent with dynamic and per-
sistent memory sections (Figure 1, left); (2) an inner Reflexion-style
learning loop [15] that converts failures into reusable knowledge
artifacts (Figure 1, right); and (3) an outer population protocol that
runs parallel instances in stages and propagates the best-discovered
memory via champion broadcast (Figure 2). A critical design con-
straint is thatno external oracle or stronger model is used: the
same LLM generates actions and synthesizes memory.
3.1 Agent Architecture: Hierarchical ReAct with
Dynamic Memory Injection
Figure 1 (left) illustrates the hierarchical agent architecture. At each
environment step, a top-levelPlannerselects the final defense ac-
tion while delegating two sub-tasks to on-demand (implemented
as tools) ReAct sub-agents:Analyst(interprets host-level observa-
tions) andActionChooser(ranks valid actions with justification).
All agents use the same underlying LLMs, and differ only in their
role-specific system prompts and their injected memory.
The FORGE protocol runs𝑁 copies of this agent hierarchy in
parallel, each called aninstance. Instance 𝑖∈{ 1,...,𝑁} maintains
persistent and dynamic memory𝑀𝑖 =(𝑀 𝑃
𝑖 ,𝑀𝐴
𝑖 ,𝑀𝐶
𝑖) for the Plan-
ner, Analyst, and ActionChooser. Persistent memory is instructions
and specific knowledge set by the user; in this setup, only the Ac-
tionChooser and the learning agents (Reflector, Exemplifier) receive
the environment action reference table, while the Planner has no
pre-supplied action knowledge so that any strategic competence it
acquires is attributable to learned artifacts. Dynamic memory is ini-
tially empty and accumulates knowledge artifacts generated by the
Algorithm 1Failure-Triggered Reflexion Loop
Require:Agent instance with memory𝑀 𝑖, attempts𝑘𝐴, failure trigger𝜏,
representation∈{Rules,Examples,Mixed}
1:for𝑎=1to𝑘 𝐴 do
2:Track per-step reward𝑟 𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝
3:Run episode with memory𝑀 𝑖
4:if∃𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝such that𝑟 𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝 <𝜏then
5: Abort; snapshot← trajectories,𝑀𝑖, metadata, environment state
6:Δ←UpdateMemory(snapshot,representation)⊲Reflector /
Exemplifier
7:Apply edits:𝑀 𝑖←Apply(𝑀 𝑖,Δ)
8:end if
9:end for
10:returnUpdated memory𝑀 𝑖
learning agents during training. Therepresentationof these artifacts
is the central experimental variable, taking one of three forms: (a)
Rules: ordered lists of conditional heuristics; (b)Examples: struc-
tured demonstrations that mimic ReAct agent interaction (thought,
tool, observation, answer) [23]; or (c)Mixed: both rules and ex-
amples generated separately over the same context. Appendix C
provides verbatim examples of generatedRulesandExamples
artifacts.
Memory is stored on disk and re-injected into each agent’s sys-
tem prompt at every attempt, with a fixed capacity to prevent un-
bounded context growth. Sub-agents are instantiated on-demand
within the Planner’s reasoning loop with their own prompts and
memory.
3.2 Inner Loop: Failure-Triggered Reflexion
Figure 1 (right) illustrates the learning mechanism. Within each
episode, the agent executes actions until completion or until a per-
step reward𝑟𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝 drops below a failure threshold𝜏. Upon failure, the

ACM CAIS ’26, May 26–29, 2026, San Jose, CA, USA Bogdanov et al.
Figure 2: Protocol Details. (Left) The FORGE protocol involves parallel execution, champion selection, graduation and broadcast
between stages. (Right) Inner learning loop inside each attempt.
episode isabortedimmediately and the full trajectory is captured. A
dedicated learning agent using the same underlying LLM,Reflector
(forRules) orExemplifier(forExamples), analyzes the trajectory
up to the failure point together with the environment state and
synthesizes a knowledge artifact: either a conditional heuristic
(Rules) or a structured interaction demonstration (Examples). In
theMixedcondition, both agents generate artifacts over the same
context. The generated artifact is appended to the agent’s memory,
and the episode restarts from step 0. This abort-and-restart cycle
converts failures into a structured learning sequence, iterating up
to𝑘𝐴 attempts per stage. Algorithm 1 formalizes this loop.
This loop constitutes a complete single-stream learning system
implementing the Reflexion pattern [ 15]. When run in isolation,
each instance independently accumulates memory from its own
trajectories without any cross-instance knowledge transfer. How-
ever, single-stream reflection in stochastic, partially observable
environments lacks a selection pressure that distinguishes genuine
policy improvement from noise: isolated instances can accumulate
counterproductive artifacts that degrade performance below the
zero-shot starting point, and even successful instances produce
high-variance policies. A population-based protocol that runs mul-
tiple instances in parallel and propagates only the best-performing
memory addresses this limitation structurally.
3.3 Outer Loop: The FORGE Protocol
To address the instability of isolated Reflexion, we propose FORGE,
amulti-stage, population-based protocolthat wraps the Re-
flexion inner loop (Algorithm 1) with three additional mechanisms:
staged trainingthat creates periodic synchronization points,cham-
pion broadcastthat propagates the best-discovered memory to the
population, andgraduationthat freezes strong solutions and con-
serves compute. Figure 2 illustrates the protocol and Algorithm 2
formalizes it.
FORGE adapts the Population-Based Training (PBT) framework
[7] from weight space to prompt space. The PBTexploitstep maps
to champion broadcast, which copies the best instance’s memory
Algorithm 2FORGE: Staged Population Memory Training
Require: Instances 𝑁 , stages 𝑆, attempts 𝑘𝐴, graduation
threshold 𝜃, failure trigger 𝜏, representation, condition
∈{FORGE,Reflexion}
1:Initialize dynamic memory𝑀 𝑖←∅for𝑖∈{1,...,𝑁}
2:Initialize graduated set𝐺←∅
3:for𝑠=1to𝑆do⊲Outer loop: staged knowledge transfer
4: Initialize each instance𝑖 in a uniquely seeded CAGE-2 en-
vironment with𝑀𝑖
5:Initialize attempt graduated set𝐻←∅
6:Initialize checkpoint Return𝑅 𝑖 =0
7:forinstance𝑖∉𝐺in parallel do⊲Concurrent
Independent Instances
8:𝑀 𝑖←ReflexionLoop(𝑀 𝑖,𝑘𝐴,𝜏,representation)⊲
Algorithm 1
9:𝑅 𝑖←Checkpoint(𝑀 𝑖)⊲frozen evaluation, no
learning
10:end for
11:𝐻←{𝑖∉𝐺|𝑅 𝑖 >𝜃}⊲new graduates
12:Freeze memories of𝐻;𝐺←𝐺∪𝐻
13:ifcondition =FORGEand|{𝑖∉𝐺}|>0then
14:𝑖 ∗←arg max𝑖∉𝐺𝑅𝑖 ⊲champion selection
15:forinstance𝑖∉𝐺do
16:𝑀 𝑖←𝑀𝑖∗ ⊲broadcast: full memory replacement
17:end for
18:end if
19:end for
20:returnFinal evaluation of all𝑁frozen instances.
artifacts to all active instances; theexplorestep maps to the Re-
flexion inner loop, which independently evolves each instance’s
memory through failure-triggered reflection within the next stage.
Two structural differences follow from operating on discrete tex-
tual artifacts rather than continuous weights: (1) broadcast per-
forms full replacement rather than interpolation, because merging
two natural-language rule sets would require a conflict-resolution

FORGE: Self-Evolving Agent Memory With No Weight Updates ACM CAIS ’26, May 26–29, 2026, San Jose, CA, USA
Table 1: Experiment Count and Evaluated Episodes by Model and Condition
Zero-Shot Reflexion (instances) FORGE (sessions) FORGE w/o grad (sessions)
Model Episodes Rules Ex Mix Rules Ex Mix Rules Ex Mix
Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite 70 70 50 50 7 (70) 7 (70) 7 (140) 2 (40) 2 (40) 2 (40)
Grok-4-Fast 100 30 30 30 3 (60) 3 (60) 3 (60) 2 (40) 2 (40) 2 (40)
Llama-4-Maverick 50 70 30 30 3 (110) 3 (60) 3 (60) 2 (40) 2 (40) 2 (40)
Qwen3-235B 50 30 30 50 4 (80) 3 (60) 3 (60) 2 (40) 2 (40) 2 (40)
mechanism that is itself unreliable, and (2) the explore step is not
a random perturbation but a semantically grounded reflection on
new failure trajectories.
Staged Training.Training is organized into 𝑆 sequential stages.
At the beginning of each stage, every active instance is initialized in
a uniquely seeded environment with its current memory𝑀𝑖. Within
the stage, each instance independently executes the Reflexion loop
(Algorithm 1) for up to𝑘𝐴 attempts. Stages serve as synchronization
points: all instances complete their inner-loop attempts before any
between-stage mechanism (checkpoint, graduation, broadcast) is
applied.
Champion Broadcast.After each stage, a frozen checkpoint eval-
uation produces a return𝑅𝑖 for each active instance. The instance
with the highest checkpoint return among active (non-graduated)
instances is designated thechampion, and its complete memory
state replaces the memory of every other active instance. This is a
destructive operation: each recipient discards its own accumulated
artifacts and begins the next stage from the champion’s memory.
The design prioritizes convergence toward the best-discovered strat-
egy over preserving population diversity.
Graduation and Early Stopping.Instances whose checkpoint re-
turn exceeds a graduation threshold𝜃 aregraduated: their memory
is frozen and they are excluded from all subsequent stages. Grad-
uation prevents regression by locking strong solutions before the
next broadcast cycle can overwrite them, and conserves compute
by excluding converged instances from further training.
When broadcast is disabled (condition =Reflexion), the proto-
col reduces to parallel independent Reflexion, the baseline against
which FORGE is compared. After all stages complete, every instance
(graduated or not) undergoes a final frozen evaluation.
4 Experimental Setup
Evaluation Task and Environment: CybORG CAGE-2.We evaluate
FORGE on CybORG CAGE-2 [8, 16], a cybersecurity gym environ-
ment modelled as POMDP where a blue defender protects a 13-host
enterprise network against an automated red attacker over a 30-step
horizon (canonical setting also includes 50- and 100-step episodes).
CAGE-2 leaderboard is dominated by RL methods; public reference
points against theB_lineattacker over 30 steps include CardiffUni
PPO−3.47(DRL top score) [ 2], rule-based heuristic−58.83, random
action−154.06, and no-action (sleeping) −218.65[ 8]. We define
two failure severity levels anchored to this scale: return <− 100
(major failure, between the heuristic and random baselines) and
return <− 150(catastrophic failure, near-random performance).
Conversely, returns above−50represent significant improvement
Table 2: Models, FORGE Configuration, and Metrics
Category Configuration / Description
Models Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite (Primary), Grok-4-Fast, Llama-4-
Maverick, Qwen3-235B
LLM Config Agent (Planner/Analyst/ActionChooser): temp=0,
max_tokens=10000
Learning (Reflector/Exemplifier): temp=0,
max_tokens=20000
Conditions Zero-shot: Empty memory, no training
Reflexion: Isolated single-stream reflection, no broad-
cast
FORGE: Reflexion + champion broadcast + graduation
FORGE w/o grad: Reflexion + champion broadcast, no
graduation
Repre-
sentations
Rules,Examples, orMixedmemory
Protocol
Params
𝑁= 10parallel instances, 𝑆= 6stages, 𝑘𝐴 = 3attempts
per stage
Hyperpara-
meters
Failure trigger𝜏=− 1.1(per-step reward); Graduation
𝜃=−15(episode return)
Metrics Evaluation Return: Mean return (𝑅= ˝𝑟𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝 , closer
to 0 is better)
Graduation Rate: % of instances reaching 𝜃=− 15
during checkpoint
Token Cost: Total prompt + completion tokens (training
+ eval)
Tail Risk: Frequency of catastrophic failures (return
<−100)
over the rule-based heuristic (−58.83), approaching the regime of
competitive RL policies.
Failure Trigger Sensitivity.The failure trigger 𝜏=− 1.1is de-
rived from the environment’s reward structure rather than tuned
as a hyperparameter. Additionally, analysis of per-step penalties
across 540 zero-shot episodes (Appendix D) reveals that penalties
fall into distinct groups:Restoreactions always cost −1.0and are
legitimate defensive operations, not failures; small failures cost
−1.1or −1.2; moderate failures−2.0to −3.2; and severe failures
−11to −14(with no values between −3.3and −10.9). Since the
trigger fires when𝑟𝑠𝑡𝑒𝑝 <𝜏 , setting𝜏=− 1.1is the smallest thresh-
old that excludes legitimate Restore penalties (exactly−1.0) while
capturing real failures with 100% precision (zero false positives) at
74% recall (7,346 of 9,926 true triggers). A sensitivity sweep over
𝜏∈{− 1.1,− 2.0,− 3.0,− 11.0}, corresponding to the natural penalty
groups, is reported alongside the main results. We set graduation

ACM CAIS ’26, May 26–29, 2026, San Jose, CA, USA Bogdanov et al.
Table 3: Combined results: mean return± SD by model, representation, and condition. ↑ = improvement, ↓ = degradation over
the reference column. Bold marks the best result per model across all FORGE variants.
Reflexion FORGE FORGE w/o grad
Model Zero-Shot Representation Mean±SDΔZS Mean±SDΔZSΔRefl Mean±SDΔZSΔReflΔFORGE
Gemini
−189.6±53.9
Rules−62.7±60.5↑67%−30.6±37.0↑84%↑51%−33.1±26.5↑83%↑47%↓8%
Examples−78.9±60.4↑58%−24.5±21.1↑87%↑69%−37.7±27.2↑80%↑52%↓54%
Mixed−81.9±74.6↑57%−32.2±28.1↑83%↑61%−32.7±30.7↑83%↑60%↓1%
Grok
−58.4±55.2
Rules−79.9±62.6↓37%−33.7±26.1↑42%↑58%−24.5±15.1↑58%↑69%↑27%
Examples−64.8±52.4↓11%−42.7±43.3↑27%↑34%−14.0±2.0↑76%↑78%↑67%
Mixed−114.4±76.8↓96%−42.2±36.9↑28%↑63%−23.2±19.4↑60%↑80%↑45%
Llama
−113.1±81.5
Rules−101.4±61.0↑10%−72.0±46.6↑36%↑29%−76.7±54.7↑32%↑24%↓7%
Examples−53.9±59.7↑52%−28.3±15.7↑75%↑48%−42.2±35.3↑63%↑22%↓49%
Mixed−44.2±40.6↑61%−29.6±25.6↑74%↑33%−23.8±9.3↑79%↑46%↑19%
Qwen
−103.3±87.3
Rules−88.4±83.5↑14%−25.2±21.0↑76%↑72%−17.3±2.6↑83%↑80%↑31%
Examples−57.6±69.5↑44%−24.3±35.8↑77%↑58%−15.5±2.3↑85%↑73%↑36%
Mixed−80.4±89.4↑22%−29.3±20.4↑72%↑64%−17.9±2.8↑83%↑78%↑39%
threshold𝜃=− 15, which corresponds to roughly10× improvement
over random agent performance [8].
Evaluation Modes.To explicitly distinguish selection from re-
porting, we define two evaluation modes: (1)Checkpoint: a frozen
single-episode probe used during training to determine graduation
and champion selection and (2)Post-Session Evaluation: a sepa-
rate measurement of frozen instances, obtained after full FORGE
session completion. Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite serves as the primary
study model with 7 independent FORGE sessions per representa-
tion followed by 1-2 evaluations per instance. Other models receive
3–4 FORGE sessions per representation as directional cross-family
probes (Table 1) followed by at least 2 evaluations per instance. The
no-graduation ablation receives 2 sessions per model per represen-
tation across all four families followed by at least 2 evaluations per
instance.
Baselines and Conditions.All results are compared against two
baselines. Thezero-shot baselineevaluates the agent with empty
memory and no training, measuring the total improvement attrib-
utable to memory evolution. TheReflexion baselineruns the same
failure-triggered reflection loop (Algorithm 1) but without cham-
pion broadcast: each instance evolves its own memory in isolation.
Comparing FORGE against zero-shot quantifies the overall gain;
comparing against Reflexion isolates the specific contribution of
population-level knowledge transfer. We evaluate four LLM families
under four conditions (Table 2): zero-shot, Reflexion, FORGE (Reflex-
ion plus broadcast and graduation, Algorithm 2), and FORGE with-
out graduation (broadcast only). Each trained condition is crossed
with three memory representations (Rules,Examples,Mixed). Ta-
ble 1 breaks down session and episode counts per condition.
5 Results
We compare four conditions (zero-shot, Reflexion, FORGE, and
FORGE without graduation) across four model families and three
memory representations (Table 3). Results are organized around five
questions: (1) the magnitude of improvement over zero-shot and Re-
flexion baselines across model families, (2) the comparative efficacy
of memory representations (Rulesvs.Examplesvs.Mixed), (3)
token cost and graduation dynamics, (4) cross-model generalization
patterns, and (5) the contribution of population broadcast versus
isolated Reflexion. We additionally report a no-graduation ablation
that isolates the contribution of graduation from that of broad-
cast. A sensitivity sweep over the failure trigger threshold𝜏 probes
whether the chosen value (−1.1) is optimal or whether restricting re-
flection to more severe failures changes convergence behavior. We
reportpost-session evaluationmetrics unless explicitly referring
tocheckpointprobes used for intermediate champion selection.
5.1 Main Findings
Performance over Zero-Shot and Reflexion.FORGE improves over
both zero-shot and Reflexion baselines for every model family under
all three representations (Table 3). Under the FORGE protocol, the
strongest configurations reduce mean negative returns to the mid-
twenties: Gemini improves from−189.6to−24.5(Examples,7 .7×),
Qwen from−103.3to−24.3(Examples,4 .3×), Llama from−113.1
to−28.3(Examples,4 .0×), and Grok from−58.4to−33.7(Rules,
1.7×). Compared to the Reflexion baseline, FORGE improves in all 12
model-representation conditions (Table 3, ΔRefl columns). Figure 3
provides a detailed comparison across all models under each rep-
resentation. The peak observedcheckpointreturn reaches −3.60
(GeminiRules), approaching the DRL top score of −3.47, although
post-session evaluation means remain lower due to sampling vari-
ance.
Representation Analysis.Figure 3 compares all three representa-
tions across all four models under zero-shot, Reflexion, and FORGE
conditions.Examplesachieves the best FORGE return for three of
four models (Gemini, Llama, Qwen), while Grok performs best un-
derRules. In the replicated Gemini study (7 sessions per condition),
all three representations yield large improvements over the zero-
shot baseline (−189.6):Examples−24.5± 21.1,Rules−30.6± 37.0,
andMixed−32.2± 28.1.Examplesachieves the best mean return
and lowest variance, whileRulesprovides the most reliable cost-
performance profile with∼40% fewer total tokens thanExamples

FORGE: Self-Evolving Agent Memory With No Weight Updates ACM CAIS ’26, May 26–29, 2026, San Jose, CA, USA
Figure 3: Comparison of memory representations (Rules,Examples, andMixed) across zero-shot, Reflexion, and FORGE
conditions for all four model families. Bars represent mean return; error bars denote SEM. Improvement factors over zero-shot
annotated above FORGE bars; checkmarks indicate the winning condition.
Figure 4: Combined analysis for Gemini-2.5-Flash-Lite. (A) Performance: All representations consistently outperform Baseline.
(B) Token Cost:Rulesrepresentation is more efficient than others. (C) Evaluation Cost-Benefit:Rulesoffers best balance of
low cost and high return.
(Figure 4, Panel B). This efficiency gap arises because example-based
memory inflates prompt length, while rule-based artifacts are more
compact and lead to faster graduation.Mixedfalls between the two
on both cost and performance (Figure 4).
Token Cost Analysis.In the replicated Gemini study (Figure 4,
Panel B),Rulesconsumes ∼106M total tokens compared to∼177M
forExamplesand ∼188M forMixed, a∼40% cost reduction. This ef-
ficiency stems from both shorter prompts and fewer active instances
due to faster graduation. The no-graduation variants consume more
tokens across all representations because all 10 instances remain
active for all 6 stages, confirming that graduation’s primary contri-
bution is compute savings (Figure 4, Panel C).
Cross-Model Analysis: Weak Models Benefit Most.We examine
generalization across model families as directional evidence (non-
Gemini models receive 3-4 FORGE sessions per representation).
The magnitude of improvement inversely correlates with baseline
strength: Gemini (worst baseline,−189.6) gains7.7×, followed by
Qwen (4.3×) and Llama (4.0×), while Grok (best baseline,−58.4)
gains1.7× (Figure 3). This pattern suggests FORGE functions pri-
marily as a variance-reduction mechanism for unreliable policies,
mitigating capability gaps rather than amplifying strong models.
For every tested family, FORGE outperforms both zero-shot and
Reflexion under all three representations.
Population Broadcast vs. Isolated Reflexion.Comparing FORGE
against the Reflexion baseline isolates the contribution of population-
level knowledge transfer (Figure 5, Panel A). FORGE improves
post-session evaluation return by 29-72% over Reflexion in all 12
model-representation conditions (Table 3, ΔRefl columns). The no-
graduation variant also outperforms Reflexion in all 12 conditions,
confirming that champion broadcast is the essential mechanism.
Reflexion instances exhibit persistently high volatility across stages
(Figure 5, Panel B), whereas FORGE steadily compresses score vari-
ance.

ACM CAIS ’26, May 26–29, 2026, San Jose, CA, USA Bogdanov et al.
Figure 5: Protocol comparison. (A) Mean evaluation return across four models under four conditions: FORGE, FORGE without
graduation, Reflexion (isolated learning), and zero-shot. FORGE and its no-graduation variant both outperform Reflexion and
zero-shot for every model. (B) Standard deviation of checkpoint scores across stages; FORGE reduces volatility steadily while
Reflexion remains near the zero-shot level (dashed).
Figure 6: Graduation dynamics and no-graduation ablation (all models pooled). (A) Active instances and per-instance compute
by stage: FORGE (solid lines) reduces active count via graduation, while the no-graduation variant (dashed) keeps all 10 instances
active throughout. Faded bars show per-active-instance token cost. (B) Adaptation tokens per instance vs. final evaluation
return by stage: FORGE’s per-instance cost drops as instances graduate; the no-graduation variant achieves a slightly better
pooled evaluation return at higher total cost. Reflexion baseline (dotted) shown for reference.
5.2 Ablation: No-Graduation
The no-graduation variant retains champion broadcast but keeps all
10 instances active throughout all 6 stages, isolating the contribu-
tion of graduation from that of broadcast. Across models, FORGE re-
duces the active instance count as stages progress (Figure 6, Panel A,
solid lines), with per-instance adaptation cost dropping as instances
graduate. The no-graduation variant (dashed) consumes roughly
twice the adaptation tokens per instance by S6 (Figure 6, Panel B).
The effect of graduation on final performance is model-dependent:
removing it helps Grok and Qwen (up to 67% improvement over
FORGE, Table 3), while Gemini and Llama perform better with
graduation in 2 of 3 representations. This split suggests that grad-
uation’s memory-freezing mechanism protects strong early-stage
artifacts in some models but terminates learning prematurely in oth-
ers. Both FORGE variants outperform the Reflexion baseline in all
12 conditions, confirming that broadcast is the essential mechanism
regardless of whether graduation is enabled.
5.3 Sensitivity: Failure Trigger Threshold
The failure trigger𝜏 determines which per-step penalties invoke
reflection and restart the episode, directly controlling the learning
signal’s composition. To assess whether the chosen 𝜏=− 1.1is
optimal, we sweep𝜏∈{− 1.1,− 2.0,− 3.0,− 11.0} on GeminiRules

FORGE: Self-Evolving Agent Memory With No Weight Updates ACM CAIS ’26, May 26–29, 2026, San Jose, CA, USA
Figure 7: Risk and variance analysis. (A) Cumulative distribution of evaluation scores (all models pooled): zero-shot shows a
heavy left tail; Reflexion partially compresses it; FORGE shifts the distribution sharply rightward. (B) Mean return ± SD by
model under zero-shot, Reflexion, and FORGE (best representation per model).
(the primary configuration). The result is non-monotone:𝜏=− 2.0
(mean−52.0) and𝜏=− 3.0(mean−46.0) both degrade relative to
𝜏=− 1.1(mean−30.6, 83% graduation), while𝜏=− 11.0yields the
best result (mean−24.6, 93% graduation). Restricting reflection to
only the most severe failures appears to produce a cleaner learning
signal, though skipping moderate failures hurts. The improvement
at𝜏=− 11.0suggests that harsher triggers and multi-threshold
triggering strategies warrant further investigation. The reward
distribution motivating𝜏=−1.1is detailed in Appendix D.
6 Discussion
The protocol’s efficacy stems from four interacting mechanisms:
(1) reducing major failures by eliminating the heavy tail of low
zero-shot returns (Figure 7, Panel A); (2) compressing variance
to stabilize outcomes (Figure 7, Panel B); (3) population-level dis-
tillation via champion broadcast; and (4) graduation-based early
stopping to reduce compute. Figure 7, Panel A shows that Reflexion
(orange) partially compresses the zero-shot tail, but FORGE shifts
the distribution rightward, reducing the rate of episodes below−100
from∼90% (zero-shot) to∼1% under the strongest configurations.
The broadcast mechanism’s consistent 29-72% improvement over
Reflexion across all 12 conditions suggests that the primary bot-
tleneck in prompt-only adaptation is not the quality of individual
reflections but the absence of a selection pressure that propagates
rare discoveries to the population.
7 Limitations & Future Work
Our study faces limitations in scope (single attacker type, fixed
30-step horizon in one application domain) and protocol dynamics
(brittle single-best broadcast, checkpoint-evaluation misalignment).
All evidence is confined to CAGE-2 B_line; generalization to other
attacker types and POMDP environments remains untested. Cross-
family findings are presented as directional evidence based on 3-
4 sessions per non-Gemini model. The failure trigger sensitivity
sweep reveals that𝜏=− 11.0outperforms the submitted 𝜏=− 1.1,
indicating that the chosen threshold is not optimal and that the
broader design space of harsher triggers and multi-threshold trig-
gering remains unexplored. Future work should address these lim-
itations by testing additional attacker variants. Promising exten-
sions include cross-strategy seeding (e.g.,MixedfromRules), cross-
model artifact transfer, co-evolutionary adversarial training, cost-
controlled comparisons against parameter-efficient fine-tuning to
clarify the trade-offs of prompt-only adaptation, and replacing the
Reflexion inner loop with alternative self-improvement methods
(e.g., TextGrad [24], Dynamic Cheatsheet [17]) to test whether the
population broadcast mechanism generalizes further.
8 Conclusion
We introduced FORGE, a staged, population-based protocol for im-
proving LLM agents viaprompt-injected memory evolution, demon-
strating that effective long-horizon strategies can be learned with-
out gradient updates or stronger teacher models. By coupling a
Reflexion-style inner loop that converts failures into dynamic knowl-
edge artifacts (Rules,Examples, or both) with an outer loop that
stabilizes learning through champion broadcast and graduation-
based early stopping, FORGE achieves 1.7-7.7× improvement over
zero-shot baselines and 29-72% improvement over the Reflexion
baseline across all 12 model-representation conditions on CybORG
CAGE-2 B_line at a 30-step horizon. Among representations,Ex-
amplesachieves the strongest returns for three of four models,
whileRulesoffers the best cost-reliability profile with ∼40% fewer
tokens. The no-graduation ablation confirms that champion broad-
cast is the essential mechanism, with graduation primarily con-
tributing compute savings. Cross-family results are directional
evidence based on 3-4 sessions per non-Gemini model; general-
ization to other attacker types and environments remains future
work. Within this benchmark, these results suggest that evolving
interpretable natural-language memory provides a viable adapta-
tion path for prompt-only learning in stochastic POMDPs where
weight updates are infeasible, and encourage further research into
alternative strategies. Reproducibility details and ethics consid-
erations are in Appendix A. The archived artifact is available at
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.19907612; the development reposi-
tory is available at https://github.com/isbogdanov/forge-protocol.

ACM CAIS ’26, May 26–29, 2026, San Jose, CA, USA Bogdanov et al.
