record_id: arxiv:2308.04026
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2308.04026
fetched_title: AgentSims: An Open-Source Sandbox for Large Language Model Evaluation
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:09:21Z

AgentSims: An Open-Source Sandbox for Large Language Model
Evaluation
Jiaju Lin1,2, Haoran Zhao 1,3 ∗, Aochi Zhang 1, Yiting Wu1,4,
Huqiuyue Ping1,5, Qin Chen 6
1PTA Studio
2 Pennsylvania State University, 3 Beihang University,
4 Sun Yat-sen University,5Zhejiang University, 6East China Normal University
3zhaohaoran@buaa.edu.cn
2jjlin.unfake@gmail.com and 6qchen@cs.ecnu.edu.cn
Abstract
With ChatGPT-like large language models
(LLM) prevailing in the community, how to
evaluate the ability of LLMs is an open ques-
tion. Existing evaluation methods suffer from
following shortcomings: (1) constrained evalu-
ation abilities, (2) vulnerable benchmarks, (3)
unobjective metrics. We suggest that task-
based evaluation, where LLM agents complete
tasks in a simulated environment, is a one-
for-all solution to solve above problems. We
present AgentSims, an easy-to-use infrastruc-
ture for researchers from all disciplines to test
the specific capacities they are interested in.
Researchers can build their evaluation tasks by
adding agents and buildings on an interactive
GUI or deploy and test new support mecha-
nisms, i.e. memory, planning and tool-use sys-
tems, by a few lines of codes. Our demo is
available at https://agentsims.com .
1 Introduction
LLMs have revolutionized Natural Language Pro-
cessing (NLP) and beyond. They demonstrate
great potential in few-shot learning(Brown et al.,
2020), code generation(Nijkamp et al., 2023), rea-
soning(Yao et al., 2023) and other tasks. Further-
more, LLM powered autonomous agents(Weng,
2023) are widely applied in solving complex prob-
lems, like multimodal generation(Shen et al., 2023),
software developing(Qian et al., 2023) and social
simulating (Park et al., 2023).
Although LLMs have reformed the paradigm
of NLP, the problem of evaluation keeps haunt-
ing this field. Old benchmarks become out-of-
date. Since LLMs achieve human-level Natural
Language Understanding (NLU) and Natural Lan-
guage Generation (NLG) abilities(OpenAI, 2023).
To address the pressing need for novel benchmarks,
the NLP community has introduced an array of
fresh evaluation tasks and datasets, encompassing a
∗ ∗Corresponding author.
diverse spectrum of abilities, including close-book
question-answering (QA) based knowledge test-
ing(Hendrycks et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2023),
human-centric standardized exams(Zhong et al.,
2023), multi-turn dialogue(Lin and Chen, 2023),
reasoning(Liu et al., 2023a; bench authors, 2023)
and safety assessment(Sun et al., 2023).
However, there are still many problems with
these new benchmarks. 1) Evaluated abilities are
limited by the task formats. Since a majority of
these tasks adopt a single-turn QA format, they
are insufficient to comprehensively evaluate vari-
ous aspects of LLMs’ capabilities. For instance,
they fail to assess the models’ proficiency in ad-
hering to instructions in dialogue or mimicking
human-like social interactions. 2) Benchmarks can
be easily hacked. Avoiding the leakage of test set is
of paramount importance when evaluate a model’s
ability. Nonetheless, considering the amount of
pretrained knowledge of LLM, it has become more
and more inevitable to inadvertently mix test cases
into the training set.(Gunasekar et al., 2023). 3)
For open-ended QA, existing metrics are not objec-
tive. Previous metrics for open-ended QA involve
automatic metrics, and human-rating as subjective
metrics(Zhou et al., 2023). In the LLM era, text seg-
ment matching based metrics become out-of-date.
To mitigate the high-costly issue of human-rating,
today’s researchers employ well-aligned LLMs like
GPT4 as automatic raters. Nevertheless, the most
significant problem of this approach is that it can
not evaluate super GPT4-level models, and LLMs
are biased toward specific features (Wang et al.,
2023b).
Based on these observations, we suggest task-
based evaluation for LLM benchmarks. Specifi-
cally, given an artificial social-economic environ-
ment, LLM-driven agents should achieve the pre-
defined task goals to prove their abilities, just like
humans accomplishing goals in real world or games
to show their capacities. Task-based evaluation is
1
arXiv:2308.04026v1 [cs.AI] 8 Aug 2023

a one-for-all solution for current issues: 1) Task-
based evaluation can test an LLM’s overall ability.
The complexity of social simulation and adaptation
far exceeds simple QA and can formulate more
challenging tasks for LLMs. LLM agents need to
be equipped with the ability from NLU to Theory
of Mind (ToM) (Premack and Woodruff, 1978). 2)
Task solving processes are less likely to be hacked.
Different from unchanged test datasets whose for-
mats can be easily mimicked and added to training
data. Task settings are diversified and the emergent
social behaviors and groups are less likely to be
described and included in training corpus. 3) Task
passing rate is an objective metric. Compared with
popular rating methods by ChatGPT, the passing
rate does not rely on any black-box rating process,
i.e. deep neural networks or human brains, thus it
is an objective and fair metric for the comparison
between LLMs.
To all-around estimate LLMs’ capacities, we
hope researchers from all fields take part in the de-
velopment of evaluation tasks. However, a key ob-
stacle to fostering a collaborative research commu-
nity is the absence of a standard paradigm, an easy-
to-use and extensible research platform. Previous
works pursue the most efficient way to implement a
sandbox while ignoring the need of non-specialist
users. Besides, the poor readability further results
in poor extensiblity and user churn. Moreover, the
agents’ performance varies with different support
systems, i.e. memory, planning and tool-use sys-
tem. We need a standard implementation to ensure
the reproducibility of experimental results.
To this end, we introduce AgentSims, an inter-
active, visualized, and program-based infrastruc-
ture for curating evaluation tasks for LLMs. It
creates an artificial town with various buildings
and residents. The core objective of AgentSims is
to streamline the task design process, eliminating
hurdles that researchers from various backgrounds
and programming proficiencies might encounter.
• For researchers focusing on LLM, AgentSims
is extendable and combinable to allow users
to combine different plan, memory and learning
systems to study the impacts and effectiveness of
various system design.
• For experts from other fields like behavioral eco-
nomics or social psychology, AgentSims pro-
vides an interactive UI for map design and agent
creation and lower the entry threshold. Such a
user-friendly architecture further facilitates the
cooperation between different fields and the fu-
ture prosperity of the LLM community.
2 Related Work
2.1 Benchmarks for Large Language Models
The emergency of ChatGPT and other LLMs re-
quires new benchmarks for effective evaluation.
bench authors (2023) is the most accepted bench-
mark to evaluate LLM’s general abilities. It con-
tains more than 200 tasks, covering from child-
hood development, to social bias. Zhong et al.
(2023) collect test tasks from human-centric stan-
dardized exams like GRE and SAT. (Hendrycks
et al., 2020; Huang et al., 2023) are benchmarks
focusing on measuring knowledge acquired in pre-
training. They covers subjects across STEM, the
humanities, the social sciences. Lin and Chen
(2023) build a benchmark for LLMs’ multiturn
dialogue abilities. Every dialogue is limited to two
turns for simplicity. Sun et al. (2023) focus on mea-
sure the safety of LLMs. They curate a adversarial
attack dataset containing insulting instructions and
test whether LLMs can be jailbroke. However,
as mentioned above, existing datasets have issues
that can not fully demonstrate abilities of LLMs.
AgentSims overcomes these difficulties and renders
a chance for overall evaluation of LLMs.
2.2 Multi Agent Cooperation
With LLMs demonstrate their overwhelming abil-
ities, researchers find that multi LLM agents can
generate better results than a single one. Nair et al.
(2023) is one of the earliest attempts of multi-agent
cooperation. It builds a forum for agents to com-
municate feedback and iteratively improve their
healthcare suggestions. Li et al. (2023) expand
the application field of agent cooperation method
by role-playing. From programming to domain-
specific QA, it surpass single agent baselines. Qian
et al. (2023) build a software development com-
pany, by meticulously dividing the development
process into four distinct stages, leading to efficient
resolution of specific subtasks. Liu et al. (2023b)
first apply multi-agent simulated society for align-
ment, where agents in a sandbox learn from social
interaction to understand moral rules. (Park et al.,
2023) is the most sophisticated application of multi
agent sandbox. Authors build support mechanisms
to enable agents to produce believable individual
and emergent social behaviors. However, none
existing methods provide a user-friendly interface
2

Figure 1: Front end of AgentSims, showing in a pixel game style. Users can create agents and buildings in the
left-side panel and observe agents behaviors in the main screen. Besides setting-then-observing, users can also play
as the mayor and talk with agents to intervene the experiment.
for unprofessional researchers or build a standard
paradigm for agent support system. Nonetheless,
current multi-agent systems are task-oriented rather
than evaluation-oriented. AgentSims works as a
platform for easy benchmark construction.
3 Key Components
As shown in Figure 2, key components of
AgentSims can be divided into two parts: 1) genera-
tive agents driven by LLM support mechanisms. 2)
buidlings and equipment that consist the sandbox
environment.
3.1 Generative Agents
If prompted properly, LLMs can generate believ-
able behaviors(Park et al., 2022). However, to
achieve human-like memory performance and long-
term coherence, LLM is not enough. We need aux-
iliary systems to enable agents to perform more
naturally. Referring to recent work(Park et al.,
2023; Wang et al., 2023a), we abstract these sup-
portive mechanisms into three parts: Planning Sys-
tem, Memory System, and Tool-Use System.
Planning System LLMs have shown some plan-
ning and reasoning capacities. However, faced
with complex tasks, vanilla LLMs always fail for
lacking long-term arrangement abilities. Hence,
we introduce a Planning System to ensure agents’
behaviors are coherent and believable. The Plan-
ning System reorganizes a goal by decomposing
the target, summarizing current condition and gen-
erating subtasks. Specifically, it is assembled by a
series of pluggable prompt modules, which assess
current achievement of ultimate goals by checking
the memory system and making decisions for next
steps. Once a new step is completed, it would be
recorded in the memory system.
Memory System. Agents capable of emulating
human behavior necessitate comprehending a vast
array of experiences, beyond what a prompt can
contain. The complete memory stream is too ex-
pensive to be accommodated in the limited context
window, and attempting to do so can overwhelm the
model. Thus, we add a memory system for agents’
experience retention and retrieval. The system is
built upon a vector database for efficient storing and
retrieving. Specifically, every agent’s daily mem-
ory is encoded into embeddings and stored in the
database. Every time when agents face some new
situation that needs the previous memory, such as
chatting with familiar people, the memory system
can retrieve the information about their relationship
to improve agent behaviour consistency.
Tool-Use System. Ideally, agents continuously
explore the simulated world would learn from pre-
vious failures and successes, then acquire diverse
skills. In our framework, to realize this feature, we
present a tool-use system, which endows agents
3

Figure 2: Overview of AgentSims architecture
with the ability to accomplish real-world tasks. Par-
ticularly, the tool use system stores equipment-
operation pairs learning from feedback of using
equipment. Once agents select equipment to in-
teract with by planning and memory system, they
need to infer an initial operation by the description
of the equipment. And the equipment will return an
operation result as feeedback. If the agent believes
the result meets their operation purpose, a new skill
would be stored in the Tool-Use System.
3.2 Buildings and Equipment
Interactive buildings and equipment are necessities
for the diversity of an LLM sandbox. They com-
pose the physical environments of the simulated
world. In our framework, a building or location con-
tains equipment like stoves or office desks. Thus,
buildings are defined by the equipment they con-
tain and equipment is the basic element composing
the interactive environment. More specifically, the
equipment can be defined by some definition texts
describing its features and support function, which
can be either hard-coded by the developer or a
language model that supports self-adaptive agent-
equipment interaction. When an agent interacts
with equipment, as shown in Figure 2, its operation
text will be sent to the background support model.
The support function then returns the operation
outcome based on the predefined rules or model-
generated texts. For example, if an agent wants to
get a cup of tea from a stove, the operation is ’Get
a cup of tea’ and the support function may return
’Meaningless operation’ according to the hard code
or ’You can not get tea from a stove’ generated by
the model. Then the agent would learn from the
feedback and refine its operations.
4 Interaction scenarios
Regarding the researchers’ backgrounds and pur-
poses, we design two interaction modes: User
Mode and Developer Mode. In the User Mode, re-
searchers who consider little about background sup-
port systems are target users. For researchers chas-
ing better LLMs performance, Developer Mode
provides flexible protocols for their development
of different support mechanisms.
4.1 User Mode
In the User Mode, AgentSims provides an inter-
active interface in a pixel game style, as shown in
Figure 1. Researchers can create agents, construct
buildings and equipment in a graphical interface, fo-
cusing on the rationality of experiment design, free
from complex background driving mechanisms.
Agent Creation. Users can define agents within
the system through an easy-to-use front end, as
shown in the Figure 3. AgentSims provides various
protocols for users to create functional agents. Not
only basic information like goals and biography,
but also options of Memory and Planning Systems.
We pre-design a list of memory and planning sys-
tems and users can choose their preference from a
drop-down menu.
Building Creation. Users can also customize
the physical environment by constructing buildings.
As shown in Figure 4, users define a building by
choosing a pre-configured building with equipment
inside. To be noticed, the equipment in buildings
are predefined but can be modified in the Developer
4

Figure 3: Agent Creation
Figure 4: Building Creation
Mode.
Experiment Intervene. Besides observing,
users can play as the major agent to participate
in the experiment. By talking with other agents,
users can intervene the experiment naturally rather
than modify agents’ memory or goals roughly.
4.2 Developer Mode
Developer Mode is designed for professional devel-
opers who are familiar with the properties of LLMs
and pursue better performance of LLMs on a well-
defined complex task. The highly-modularized fea-
ture of AgentSims enables developers to add new
functions within a few lines of code.
Agent Design. Developers have the flexibility
to create agents tailored for various objectives and
assemble diverse agents within a single sandbox
for observation. To streamline the process of agent
customization, we’ve abstracted the LLM back-
bone and distinct support systems into separate
classes and function calls, as illustrated below.
This empowers developers to personalize an agent
by making adjustments to these abstract functions.
class LLMCaller:
def __init__(self, model: str) -> None:
self.model = get_model(model)
def ask(self, prompt: str) :
result = self.model.generate(prompt)
return result
class Agent:
def __init__(self, name, bio, goal, model,
memorySystem, planSystem, buildings,
cash):
self.state = State()
self.state.buildings = buildings
self.state.cash = cash
self.caller = Caller(model)
def plan(self) -> None:
self.state.plan_prompt = ...
self.state.plan =
self.caller.ask(self.state.pl_prompt)
def memory_store(self) -> None:
self.state.memory_prompt = ...
self.state.memory =
self.caller.ask(self.state.mem_prompt)
def use(self, facility: str, operation: str,
description: str) -> None:
self.state.use_prompt = ...
self.state.use =
self.caller.ask(self.state.use_prompt)
Building and Equipment Design. To customize
the physical environment, developers can design
new buildings and equipment by configuring corre-
sponding json files.
A new equipment can be defined by its type, de-
scription and a support function.
[{"id": 1,
"type": "counter",
"function":...,
"description": "This is the counter ...",}]
In some cases, agents can purchase commodities
or earn salaries at the equipment. We use another
configure file to annotate these economic features.
[{ "id": 1,
"menu": {
"chicken": 20,},
"salary":0,}],
We define buildings by a type and the equipment it
contains. Hence we use a two-dimensional array to
mark the facility ids in the building blocks.
[{"assets": "store_v1.2_0719",
"id": 1,
"price": 2000,
"type": "store",
"blocks":[[1,0,0...1,1]],
"equipment":[0,1,0..]]}]
5

5 Implementation
AgentSims is run using Python 3.9 1 and requires
installing the requirements.txt file provided in the
codebase using Python’s package manager PyPI2.
5.1 Backend
The web server is built using Tornado 3, a
lightweight Python web framework. It also uses
the websockets library for API calls and push noti-
fications, and mysql-connector-python to interact
with the MySQL4 database.
5.2 Frontend
Frontend The web client is built with Unity5. The
client built by WebGL6 is embedded in the project
code and can be accessed through a browser after
proxying with nginx7.
6 Example Application Tasks
6.1 Subject LLM as participants
When subject LLM agents are participants of an
artificial scenario, researchers can evaluate LLM’s
social abilities, like ToM . In this case, the formu-
lation of specific social scenes is realized by other
baseline agents driven by stronger LLMs. For ex-
ample, to study a new model’s social adaptation
abilities in a hostile environment, we can embed
colleague agents driven by GPT4 with a strong de-
sire of bullying newcomers. Then we place subject
agents into this adversarial milieu and test whether
the new model can understand other’s emotion and
improve how colleagues perceive it.
6.2 Subject LLM as mayor
To assess LLM’s long-term planning and organiza-
tion abilities, researchers can appoint the subject
LLM as the mayor of a town or the president of a
company, where residents or employees are driven
by baseline agents like GPT4. To overcome the
difficulties set ahead deliberately or emerging dur-
ing the experiments, then achieve the final goal of
the task, the subject LLM needs to recruit new resi-
dents to handle new problems, issue sound policies
1https://www.python.org/downloads/release/
python-390
2https://pypi.org/
3https://www.tornadoweb.org/en/stable/
4https://www.mysql.com/
5https://unity3d.com
6https://get.webgl.org
7https://nginx.org/en/
and modify the out-of-date ones, found new func-
tional buildings to satisfy emerging requirements,
and so on. By analyzing the success rate of LLM
mayor under different difficulties, researchers can
gain valuable insights into the diverse capabilities
of the LLM.
6.3 Applications besides Evaluation
Besides evaluating LLMs, AgentSims can be used
as a data generation platform. Due to the fantastic
NLG abilities of LLMs, researchers have applied
them in data annotation and augmentation. How-
ever, some data involving social judgement and
participation necessitate a more intricate approach
than a single prompt can provide. Thus, we can
simulate a specific social background and let LLMs
generate data more precisely. Liu et al. (2023b)
have applied simulated society in alignment data
generation. With AgentSims tailored for more intri-
cate social simulations, its potential for enhancing
data generation across various disciplines is unde-
niable.
Moreover, our program can also benefit social sci-
ence researchers, by conducting more controllable
preliminary experiments. Given that sota LLMs
can understand human instructions and simulate
human behaviours, social science researchers can
design social environments as they wish for prelim-
inary studies. Once researchers have a hypothesis,
pilot experiments can be conducted in our virtual
sandbox as a feasibility check.
7 Conclusion
In this paper, we present AgentSims, avisualized
and program-based infrastructure for LLM test
sandbox construction. AgentSims aims to facil-
itate researchers in effectively building LLM evalu-
ation tasks. It not only intends to make all its code
openly available but also commits to continuously
updating its documentation with comprehensive
tutorials.
Limitations
As a sandbox system, AgentSims’ simulation abil-
ity is limited by the accuracy of LLMs and the
diversity of buildings and equipment. It can never
fully reflect real world cases. Besides, although
task-based evaluation is a sound approach to mea-
sure the general ability of LLMs, it can hardly re-
flect fine-grained abilities like math reasoning. The
pass rate of tasks can not provide insights on why
LLMs success or fail.
