record_id: arxiv:2608.01369
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.01369
fetched_title: CRAFTS: COLLABORATIVEROLE-ADAPTIVEFINE-TUNING OF LLM AGENTS FORCHEMICALPROCESSSIMULATION
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:01:09Z

CRAFTS: COLLABORATIVEROLE-ADAPTIVEFINE-TUNING OF
LLM AGENTS FORCHEMICALPROCESSSIMULATION
PREPRINT
Ziyun Zhang1,† Yuxin Lin2,† Eldin Wee Chuan Lim1,∗ Xinghao Ding2,∗
1Department of Chemical & Biomolecular Engineering, National University of Singapore
2Key Laboratory of Multimedia Trusted Perception and Efficient Computing,
Ministry of Education of China, Xiamen University, Xiamen, Fujian, China
†Equal contribution.∗Corresponding authors.
/githubGitHub
ABSTRACT
Constructing an executable chemical-process model remains manually intensive. Chemical engineers
translate underspecified requests into coupled decisions about unit operations, thermodynamics,
streams, specifications, degrees of freedom (DoF), initialization, solver repair, and optimization; one
error can invalidate the model. CRAFTS mirrors the staged workflow of chemical engineers by decom-
posing simulation building into bounded subtasks assigned to seven bounded roles, with deterministic
IDAES/Pyomo gates between stages. Given a natural-language request, process flowsheet diagram
(PFD) evidence, and curated chemical-engineering knowledge, Input Understanding and Intent re-
cover requirements, constraints, and process semantics; visual, topology, and specification specialists
translate them into typed simulator contracts; and Debug and Optimization support bounded repair
and eligible optimization. Fine-tuning is applied to the three schema-critical visual, topology, and
specification roles, while the remaining roles use untuned Qwen. The resulting VisualGraphIR,
TopologyIR, SpecIR, BuildPlan, and SolveReport expose unit, port, thermodynamic, numerical, and
execution decisions. Compatible constructors, property packages, and runners are attached only
after semantic artifacts pass engineering gates. We introduce OpenIDAES-450, a 450-case IDAES
process- simulation dataset, and evaluate the complete seven-role LangChain/LangGraph workflow
through solve and eligible optimization on its frozen 82-case held-out split. CRAFTS completes the
prescribed validation and execution contract for for 91.5% of cases and achieves unit, stream, and
directed-connection F1 scores of 0.815, 0.791, and 0.782. These results demonstrate the effectiveness
of role specialization, typed intermediate representations, and deterministic engineering gates for
reliable automated process-model construction.
Keywordschemical process simulation · multi-agent systems· IDAES/Pyomo· code-oriented modeling· LoRA
fine-tuning
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) increasingly coordinate scientific tools [ 1, 2, 3], extract structured records from
technical text [4], and drive autonomous laboratory and discovery workflows [5, 6]. These systems show that LLMs can
orchestrate scientific tools, but their targets are experimental protocols, retrosynthesis, or extracted records rather than
executable process-simulation models.
Despite mature commercial simulators such as Aspen Plus/HYSYS, chemical-process model construction still depends
heavily on manual engineering work and domain experience [7, 8]. An engineer must interpret an incomplete process
need, organize unit operations and streams, choose compatible thermodynamics and property packages, specify operating
targets, close DoF, initialize recycles, and diagnose numerical failures. When a model fails, the relevant cause may
be distributed across flowsheet connections, configuration choices, initialization procedures, and solver diagnostics,
arXiv:2608.01369v1 [cs.AI] 2 Aug 2026

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
Prior works — Multi-agent over Black-box Simulation CFAFTS (Ours) — Fine-Tuning of Multi-agent over White-box Simulation
1 Evidence & Understand
• Nature language
• PFD/Sketch
• Specifications
2 Planning & Generation
Planer
Parser
Coder
3 Simulation & Debug
Com Interface
4 Evaluation & Optimization
Black-box
Simulator
No access equations
Hard to diagnose
Hard to reproduce
Gradient unavailable
Multi-agent Collaboration LLMs & AI Capabilities
• Reasoning & Planning
• Code Generation
• Knowledge Retrieval
Tool & Environment
• Aspen Plus/HYSYS
• Com Interface
• Only Window System
Challenge & Limitation
Commercial APIs
AspenTech: License
Expensive
Limited Transparency
LangGraph Multi-agent Local & Fine-tune LLMs Tool & Environment Advantages
1 Input Understanding
• Nature language
• PFD/Sketch
• ChE Knowledge
2 Intent Route Search
• Key unit options
• Thermodynamics, etc.
Process family (e.g. HDA)
3 Fine-tune agents build Topology
Descriptor
{
’’equipment’’: […],
’’streams’’: […],
’’units’’: […],
’confidence’’: 0.93
}
4 Evaluation & Optimization
Topology
Specification
White-box
Simulator
• IDAES-based simulation
• Equation-oriented
• Direct Python coding
• Local Qwen Deployment
• Domain-specific Fine-tuning
• Engineering Reasoning
Fully local & Private
IDEAS: Open-source
Cheaper
More transparent
Full access equations
Easy to diagnose
Easy to reproduce
Gradient information
&
&
Figure 1: From closed simulation workflows to inspectable equation-oriented models. Left: conventional process
simulation (e.g. Aspen Plus/HYSYS) relies on expert-driven interaction with commercial simulators, where model
construction and failure diagnosis often require expert-driven interaction and uniform inspectable substrate for agentic
reasoning. Right: CRAFTS combines LoRA-adapted Qwen agents with an open IDAES/Pyomo substrate. Agents
generate typed engineering artifacts that are compiled into executable models whose variables, constraints, equations,
and solver diagnostics remain inspectable for further validation, repair, and optimization. The detailed multi-agent
workflow and deterministic gates are presented in Figure 2.
CapabilityCePro. 1 T2Sim.2 S2Sim.3 Ours
Open equation substrate✗ ✗ ✗ ✓
Structured artifacts△✓ ✓ ✓
Role-specific fine-tuning✗ ✗ ✗ ✓
ChE knowledge✓△ △✓
Fail-closed checks△ △✓ ✓
Process optimization✓ ✓ ✗ ✓
Table 1: Demonstrated capabilities of contemporary process-simulation agent systems: 1CeProAgents [13], 2From Text
to Simulation [14], and 3Sketch2Simulation [15]. ✓ first-class,△ partial, ✗ functionality outside demonstrated scope.
making repair iterative and expert-intensive. These choices are tightly coupled: a wrong endpoint, component alias,
property boundary, or specification target can invalidate downstream construction or solving. A plausible paragraph,
flowsheet sketch, or generated script is therefore not enough; an executable model must satisfy structural, physical,
numerical, and solver contracts simultaneously.
Chemical engineers address this complexity through staged behavior. They recover requirements and constraints,
assemble and inspect topology, close the numerical model, materialize and initialize it, read diagnostics, and repair
the failed layer before optimization. While the CRAFTS decomposes model construction into distinct but dependent
engineering subtasks, assigns bounded responsibility to collaborating role-specialized LLM agents, and passes typed
artifacts through deterministic gates. This division of labor is motivated by the different error surfaces of interpretation,
topology, specification, and execution, rather than by generic LLM orchestration. It accelerates the engineer’s iterative
workflow without replacing engineering judgment, while preserving the intermediate state and intervention points on
which that workflow relies.
This design follows process-systems engineering (PSE), where a flowsheet is an equation-oriented model with unit-
operation structure, thermophysical packages, specifications, and solver state, not merely a diagram or paragraph [9, 10].
Built on the open IDAES/Pyomo substrate [ 11, 12], CRAFTS exposes equations, variables, constraints, and solver
state as inspectable and programmable objects, enabling localized validation and repair. It materializes VisualGraphIR,
TopologyIR, SpecIR, BuildPlan, SolveReport, and optional optimization records before and during execution. Figure 1
contrasts closed, expert-driven simulation workflows with the open-substrate pipeline, while Figure 2 shows the typed
handoffs, deterministic gates, and bounded stage-specific repair.
CRAFTS makes four contributions:
2

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
• Typed engineering formulation.CRAFTS converts requests and optional PFDs into explicit requirement,
visual, topology, specification, build, and solve artifacts, exposing simulator-critical decisions before code
generation.
• Role-specific adaptation.Seven bounded roles separate interpretation, graph recovery, numerical closure,
diagnosis, and optimization; dedicated LoRA adapters are used only for the three schema-critical roles.
• Fail-closed executable workflow.Deterministic gates validate schema, topology, ports, thermodynamics, DoF,
initialization, physical consistency, and solver status, while stage-local repair preserves previously validated
state.
• Open benchmark and controlled evaluation.OpenIDAES-450 provides 450 auditable IDAES tasks, a frozen
82-case test split, and per-case artifacts and execution traces for reproducible comparison.
2 Related Work
ChE representation and simulation.Natural language, PFDs, SFILES/eSFILES, and learned flowsheet representations
encode increasing levels of process structure [16, 17, 18]. However, these representations do not by themselves resolve
the topology, property-package, specification, and degrees-of-freedom decisions required for executable equation-
oriented simulation. Commercial simulators provide mature modeling and automation capabilities, but typically do not
expose the complete symbolic model and execution state through a uniform, programmatically inspectable substrate. In
contrast, IDAES represents variables, constraints, connections, specifications, and solver results as accessible Python
objects. This inspectability supports reproducible model assembly, structural validation, and localized diagnosis. Prior
IDAES studies consider reinforcement-learning-based conceptual design [19] and knowledge-graph digital twins [20],
but do not investigate LLM-based multi-agent systems for autonomous construction, validation, and repair of executable
equation-oriented process models. CRAFTS then builds on the code-native IDAES/Pyomo ecosystem to integrate LLM
agents with inspectable process-model objects and solver states.
Agentic process simulation.Recent systems apply LLMs and autonomous agents to automate simulation planning [14],
text-to-flowsheet generation [21], sketch-to-HYSYS conversion [15], Aspen Plus process development [13, 22], and
natural-language interfaces for A VEV A simulation, distillation design, optimization, carbon accounting, microreactor
design, and flowsheet correction [ 23, 24, 25, 26]. Related studies further explore domain adaptation, multi-agent
optimization, scientific-agent evaluation, and automated research workflows [27, 28, 29, 30].
Despite this progress, many existing approaches remain challenged by (i) reliance on commercial simulation platforms
with limited programmatic access to internal model structures and execution states, which complicates inspection,
debugging, and reproducible repair; (ii) dependence on hosted proprietary AI models, which restricts local deployment,
controllability, and practical adoption in industrial settings; and (iii) insufficient integration of ChE knowledge into
agentic flowsheet construction, resulting in weak consistency guarantees across topology, thermophysical properties,
specifications, and simulator capabilities. CRAFTS studies this combined setting on the open IDAES/Pyomo substrate,
where role-specific agents propose engineering artifacts and deterministic gates control their promotion into executable
models.
3 Problem Setting
3.1 Task Definition
Given a request bundle xi = (r i, pi), curated ChE knowledge (K), and verified IDAES-based simulator capabilities
(C), CRAFTS generates validated simulator-facing artifacts
Ai =f(x i, K, C) ={G i, Vi, Ti, Si, Bi, Ei, Oi},(1)
where ri is the natural-language request and pi is PFD evidence. The generated artifacts include a requirement
interpretation artifact (Gi), VisualGraphIR (Vi), TopologyIR (Ti), SpecIR (Si), compiled BuildPlan (Bi), SolveReport
(Ei), and optional optimization artifact (Oi). K encodes reusable ChE knowledge for unit operations, thermodynamics,
ports, DoF closure, initialization, and simulator constraints.
Following PSE practice that treats model structure and execution state as first-class objects [9, 11], we evaluate two
complementary properties: structural reference alignment and executable workflow success. Structural reference is
measured by macro F1 over normalized unit records (UC), stream records (SC), and directed connection pairs (CC).
3

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
For requestiand metricm, let eYi,m andY i,m denote predicted and reference sets:
F1 i,m =



0,no valid artifact,
1, eYi,m =Y i,m =∅,
2| eYi,m∩Y i,m|
| eYi,m|+|Y i,m|
,otherwise.
(2)
The benchmark-level score is
F1 m = 1
N
NX
i=1
F1 i,m.(3)
The Workflow Success (WS) measures whether a request completes all required stages, including interpretation,
topology validation, specification closure, BuildPlan compilation, model construction, initialization, accepted solver
termination, and optional optimization. Letz i,s∈{0,1}indicate whether requestisatisfies stages:
Wi =
Y
s∈Si
zi,s,(4)
WS = 100
N
NX
i=1
Wi.(5)
UC, SC, and CC measure agreement with the frozen structural reference, whereas Workflow Success measures
completion of the prescribed validation and execution contract; all metrics use the same fixed denominator. Explicit-
request satisfaction and physical residuals are reported separately in the supplementary material.
3.2 Artifact State
CRAFTS maintains typed intermediate artifacts that preserve engineering decisions throughout the model-construction
process. The requirement artifact Gi captures interpreted process objectives, constraints, ambiguities, and provenance.
When PFD evidence is available, VisualGraphIR Vi represents visual entities and relations, while TopologyIR Ti and
SpecIRS i encode the process structure and operating specifications required for simulator construction.
A deterministic compiler transforms validated structural artifacts into an executable construction plan:
Bi = compile(T i, Si, C),(6)
where C specifies verified simulator capabilities. The resulting SolveReport Ei records construction status, initialization
results, degrees-of-freedom closure, solver termination, physical checks, and failure diagnostics. Optional optimization
artifactsO i finally store validated optimization configurations and results.
These artifacts form the structured LangGraph state. Each role receives only the request, available evidence, curated
ChE knowledge, promoted ancestors, and simulator capability constraints; evaluator references remain inaccessible
during generation, repair, and execution.
3.3 Promotion States
Rather than relying on free-form agent outputs, CRAFTS promotes artifacts through deterministic validation stages.
Representation gates verify artifact schema, entity consistency, and required relations. Compilation gates validate unit
availability, port compatibility, property-package support, graph connectivity, and specification targets before model
generation. Runtime gates validate model construction, degrees-of-freedom closure, initialization, solver termination,
physical consistency, and optimization feasibility when required.
A request is considered workflow-successful only when all required stages in Eq. 5 are satisfied. These promotion
states provide explicit checkpoints for diagnosis and bounded repair while preserving the intermediate engineering state
throughout execution.
4 CRAFTS Workflow
4.1 Overview
CRAFTS decomposes chemical-process model construction into staged agentic reasoning and deterministic validation
rather than a single code-generation task. Specialized agents progressively transform engineering requests and available
4

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
Algorithm 1ChE-informed artifact promotion
1:Interpret chemical engineer’s natural-language requests/PFD cues into ChE-informed stateG
2:Generate and validate VisualGraphIRV
3:ifvisual contracts failthen
4:bounded repair or fail closed
5:end if
6:Assemble and validate TopologyIRT
7:iftopology contracts failthen
8:bounded repair or fail closed
9:end if
10:Generate SpecIRS; validate schema, targets, and expected-DoF intent
11:ifspecification contracts failthen
12:bounded repair or fail closed
13:end if
14:Compile acceptedT,S, andCinto hermetic BuildPlanB
15:ExecuteBin sandbox mode
16:ifthe solved state passes execution checks and optimization is requestedthen
17:validate variables/objective, release controls, and optimize
18:end if
19:Record reports, provenance, and terminal statusE
process evidence into typed intermediate artifacts, including requirement interpretation, VisualGraphIR, TopologyIR,
SpecIR, BuildPlan, and SolveReport. Deterministic gates validate artifact contracts, compile accepted representations,
execute the resulting IDAES model, and perform bounded stage-specific repairs. This separation allows LLM agents
to provide flexible engineering reasoning while preserving the reliability and inspectability required for equation-
oriented simulation. Figure 2 illustrates the workflow on a toluene hydrodealkylation (HDA) process, and Algorithm 1
summarizes artifact promotion.
4.2 Requirement and Structure Recovery
The Input Understanding Agent extracts process objectives, operating constraints, topology relations, and unresolved
ambiguities from the original request. The Intent Router maps these requirements to relevant chemical engineering
concepts and unit-operation relations using curated ChE knowledge. The resulting requirement artifact provides a
structured basis for downstream model construction.
When PFD evidence is available, the Visual Agent converts visual information into VisualGraphIR, representing
process entities and their relations. The Topology Agent then maps the interpreted requirements and visual evidence to
TopologyIR, defining the process structure required for simulation. A deterministic topology validator checks schema
validity, connectivity, port compatibility, and simulator capability constraints before promotion.
4.3 Specification Closure and Model Compilation
After topology validation, the Specification Agent generates SpecIR to define operating targets and close the degrees
of freedom of the process model. Deterministic specification gates verify target validity, variable resolution, and
consistency with the accepted topology before model construction.
The deterministic compiler then constructs the BuildPlan Bi, as defined in Eq. 6. Unlike model-generation stages,
compilation and execution are fully deterministic to avoid LLM’s flexible reasoning: promoted artifacts are translated
into IDAES objects, initialized, and solved without further LLM intervention. The resulting SolveReport records
numerical status, realized degrees of freedom, solver termination, physical checks, and failure diagnostics.
4.4 Diagnosis, Bounded Repair, and Optimization
When validation or execution fails, CRAFTS localizes the failure to the corresponding artifact stage rather than
regenerating the entire model. A debugging role analyzes the request, promoted artifacts, validator reports, and solver
diagnostics to identify the responsible layer, and a deterministic failure router applies an allowlisted repair before
returning the artifact to its validation stage. Invalid artifacts are prevented from propagating downstream, and runs that
exhaust the repair budget fail closed. This stage-specific repair strategy preserves intermediate engineering decisions
5

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
from idaes.core import
from idaes.models.unit_
models import *
import pyomo.environ as pyo
...
Supported
1 User input & ChE Evidence
(Input Agent-assisted)
ChE User:
Build the HDA process with
the separation section after
the recycle loop. The
process should include the
liquid preheater and the
distillation column.
1.2 Retrieved ChE knowledge
1.1 PFD/Flowchart Evidence
• Process family
• Unit operator registry
• Property package & components
• IDAES/Pyomo builder availability
• Engineer heuristic & constraints
2 Evidence Grounding & Intent
Routing (Intend Agent-assisted)
+
Retrieved Process Family:
HDA in BTX system
1. hydrodealkylation (HDA)
• Temp. = 573-673 K
• Pressure = 2-4 MPa
• Catalyst: Pt/Pd/Ni
H2
CH4+
2. Reactor (R101)
(toluene) (benzene)
(hydrogen) (methane)
4. Distillation column
(C102)
Overhead: Benzene
Bottoms: Toluene
(High purity)
3. Flash separator (F101)
Vapor (H2, CH4)
Liquid (Aromatics)
Toluene disproportionation (TDP)
2
+
(toluene) (benzene) (xylene)
Reject cue: No xylene product
3 Topology Reconstruction
(LoRA Topology Agent-assisted)
Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct
(LoRA Visual Role)
{
“confidence’’: 0.93
“label_text’’: “F101”,
“equipment’’: “Flash column”,
“topology’’: “one_inlet_two_out let”,
“role_hint’’: “post-reactor separation”,
“shape_cues”: “drum-like vertical vessel”
“state_cues”: {“T”: “325 K”, “∆P”: “0 Pa”}
}
1. Label Cue
2. Shape Cue 3. State Cue
• Vertical vessel
• Rounded drum
Equipment
Identifier
(OCR)
Operating info.
(text recognition
+ understanding)
4. Connection Cue
• 1 inlet (left)
• 2 outlets (top, right)
• Branch topology
5. Context Cue
• Downstream of R101
• Upstream of C102
• Post-reactor separation
Qwen2.5-Coder-7B
(LoRA Topology/Spec Role)
1. Feed streams 2. Reactor (R101)
3. Flash (F101)
4. Column (C102)
5. Context Cue
4 Specification Generation
(LoRA Topology/Spec Agent-assisted)
• Toluene feed flow
0.30 mol/s C7H8
• Hydrogen feed flow
0.30 mol/s H2
0.02 mol/s CH4
• Conversion 75%
• Outlet temp. 600 K
• Pressure 3.5 bar
• Flash temp. 325 K
• Flash ∆P 0 Pa
• Reflux ratio 0.5
• Distillate (Benzene) 0.95
• Bottoms (Toluene) 0.95
• Compressor (C101)
• 20% recycle to purge
2.1 Accepted Intent
2.2 Rejected Intent
3.2 Structured Visual (Typed JSON)
3.1 Visual Agent Sees in the PFD
4.1 Process Specifications Extracted
5 Determistic Validation
1. Connectivity check
• All stream are physically connected
• No broken or missing connections
2. Property Package Check
• All required properties are available
3. DoF (Degree of Freedom)
• Total DoF = 0
• The model is square and solvable
Interpret the request as
HDA with flash separation
and vapor recycle. Preserve
......, while routing the flash
liquid through a preheater to
a distillation column for
benzene–toluene recovery.
6 Solve IDAES / Plan and optimize
(Optimization Agent-assisted)
Check IDAES/Pyomo flowsheet
Plan and execute optimization
1. Repository check
2. IDAES builder check
6.1 Workflow Checks & Execution
project_repo/
unit_models/
property_models/
solver_plugins/
utils/
config.yaml
4. Solved Result Report
BuildPlanIR
Sandbox
Solver
3. Solve Execution
Metric
Status
DoF
Benzene
Toluene
Conversion
Column Reflux
Convergence
Solve time
Value
Optimal
0
0.162 mol/s
0.105 mol/s
0.75
0.5
Success
33.21 s
5. Optimization planning (opt.)
7 Debug & Recovery Agent (LangGraph)
 Objective
 Variables
 Method
 Next step
etc.
• Diagnose: Read failure and identify root
• Repair: fix and return to relevant node
• Validate: Continue when validation pass
Figure 2: CRAFTS artifact workflow illustrated through an HDA (hydrodealkylation to benzene) example. Starting
from the chemical engineer user request, PFD, and ChE-knowledge-informed evidence, the workflow performs intent
routing, VisualGraphIR, TopologyIR and SpecIR generation, deterministic connectivity, property-package, and DoF,
BuildPlan compilation, and IDAES/Pyomo execution before optional optimization. Failed artifacts are returned to their
responsible stage for bounded diagnosis and repair through the LangGraph workflow architecture. LLM agents provide
stage-specific engineering reasoning, while validation, compilation, repair application, and numerical execution remain
deterministic workflow operations.
and supports transparent debugging of the model-construction process. After a valid solve, an optimization role then
proposes an objective, decision variables, constraints, and target DoF.
Promoted artifacts are maintained throughout the workflow, while validation, compilation, repair, simulation, and
optimization remain non-LLM execution stages under fixed solver settings.
5 Experiments
5.1 Benchmark
OpenIDAES-450 contains 450 user-facing chemical-engineering requests paired with executable IDAES process
models, intermediate artifacts, and auditable execution records. The benchmark covers unit-operation selection, topology
construction, property-package assignment, specification closure, initialization, recycle handling, solver diagnosis,
and optimization. We freeze 82 requests as the held-out test set for all reported evaluations, while the remaining 368
requests are used only for training and development of CRAFTS-specific components. Test membership, request order,
and evaluation denominators remain fixed across all experiments. Cases derived from the same source model or process
template are assigned to the same split, and duplicate requests and topology records are removed before evaluation.
5.2 Evaluation Protocol
All experiments use the same frozen 82-request test set, evaluator-only references, structural scorers, and failure-retention
rules. For framework comparisons, we keep the CRAFTS role interfaces, artifact schemas, deterministic gates, compiler,
and execution settings fixed while replacing only the orchestration framework. For model comparisons, alternative
backends are evaluated through the same role interfaces and workflow configuration. Literature baselines retain their
original architectures and are reported separately. These comparisons evaluate complete system configurations under a
shared artifact and execution protocol, rather than isolated foundation-model capabilities.
5.3 Implementation Details
CRAFTS is implemented as a LangGraph workflow with seven model-backed roles and deterministic validation and
execution nodes. LangChain interfaces bind each role to its prompt, schema, structured-output parser, and artifact
6

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
Method Execution Structural F1
Workflow Success (%)↑UC↑SC↑CC↑
Architecture controls
CeProAgents-style [13] 74.4 0.486 0.188 0.300
Text-to-Simulation-style [14] 68.3 0.456 0.210 0.293
Sketch2Simulation-style [15] 76.8 0.454 0.196 0.289
Orchestration-framework controls
OpenAI Agents SDK [31] 79.3 0.571 0.363 0.474
Microsoft Agent Framework [32] 72.0 0.544 0.364 0.453
CrewAI [33] 76.8 0.556 0.360 0.466
Uniform-model controls
GPT-5 mini [34] 54.9 0.392 0.280 0.203
Claude Sonnet 4.6 [35] 45.1 0.210 0.159 0.167
Gemini 3.5 Flash [36] 28.0 0.215 0.166 0.128
CRAFTS (role-adaptive local Qwen) 91.5 0.815 0.791 0.782
Table 2: Frozen 82-request results (higher is better). Workflow Success is the percentage of requests that pass every
required stage in Eq. 5 and is reported independently of fixed-denominator structural macro F1. Both the architecture
and orchestration-framework controls use GPT-5 mini with the shared IDAES execution substrate and structured-output
schema; the architecture controls are author reimplementations of the cited agent decompositions.
contract. The Visual Descriptor uses Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct with supervised fine-tuning (SFT) via LoRA, while the
Topology and Specification Agents use separate LoRA adapters on Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-Instruct; the remaining four roles
use locally deployed Qwen3.6-27B with ChE-knowledge-informed prompting. All Qwen fine-tuning and local inference
are performed on NVIDIA A40 GPUs, whereas external baseline models are accessed through their commercial APIs.
Candidate outputs are archived and promoted only after passing deterministic fail-closed contracts. Full training settings,
software versions, hardware details, and role-level configurations are provided in the supplementary material.
6 Main Results
6.1 Overall comparison.
Table 2 compares architecture, orchestration, and uniform-model controls on the frozen held-out requests. Workflow
Success measures end-to-end completion under the shared CRAFTS/IDAES execution protocol, while UC, SC, and CC
independently measure structural agreement with evaluator-only references. A request contributes zero only when it
produces no scorable topology artifact, and all 82 requests remain in every denominator. CRAFTS succeeds on 75 of 82
requests (91.5%), with a two-sided 95% Wilson interval of 83.4–95.8%. All methods are evaluated on the same 82
requests using fixed decoding and execution settings, and the reported results are point estimates on this frozen test split.
Observed differences and relational assembly.CRAFTS obtains the highest observed value in every column. Relative
to the strongest non-CRAFTS value in each column, the measured differences are 12.2 percentage points for Workflow
Success and 0.244/0.427/0.308 for UC/SC/CC. The larger SC and CC gains are particularly important in chemical
process modeling: identifying individual units such as a flash, reactor, or compressor is insufficient unless material
identity is preserved across branches, stream connectivity remains consistent, and every connection terminates at a
legal, directionally correct port. CRAFTS therefore improves not only equipment recovery but also relational flowsheet
assembly, which directly determines whether an equation-oriented model can be constructed and solved. UC/SC/CC
measure structural reference alignment, whereas Workflow Success additionally incorporates topology, thermodynamic,
specification, construction, initialization, numerical, and requested-optimization gates.
Role-adapted local models.Under the same role graph and evaluation protocol, the locally deployed role-adaptive
Qwen configuration outperforms all evaluated uniform commercial-backend substitutions. Its Workflow Success exceeds
GPT-5 mini, Claude Sonnet 4.6, and Gemini 3.5 Flash by 36.6, 46.4, and 63.5 percentage points, respectively. These
system-level results show that the role-adaptive configuration is more effective than the evaluated uniform-model
substitutions under the same workflow.
7

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
0.0 0.5 1.0
Normalized optimizer step
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
Target-token probability
Visual
Topology
Specification
Train
Held-out
95% CI
Figure 3: LoRA SFT target-token probability over normalized optimizer steps for the Visual Descriptor (Qwen3-VL-8B)
and the Topology and Specification Agents (Qwen2.5-Coder-7B). Solid and dashed curves denote training and held-out
validation, respectively; shading indicates 95% confidence intervals.
Ablated condition Execution Structural F1
Work. Success (%)↑UC↑SC↑CC↑
Local Qwen (no FT) 36.6 0.242 0.109 0.135
No ChE knowledge 0.00 0.058 0.116 0.083
No visual evidence 25.6 0.174 0.078 0.105
Merged topo.–spec. 30.5 0.273 0.117 0.133
No Debug replay 18.3 0.151 0.104 0.090
Full CRAFTS 91.5 0.815 0.791 0.782
Table 3: Ablation study of CRAFTS on the frozen 82-request test split. The results quantify the impact of role-specific
adaptation, ChE-informed reasoning, visual evidence, topology–specification separation, and debugging-based repair
on executable process-model construction.
The visual stage requires multimodal interpretation of process symbols, spatial relations, and stream connectivity;
topology construction requires schema-constrained graph generation and simulator compatibility reasoning; and
specification closure requires precise mapping between engineering targets, variables, and degrees of freedom. The
gains from role adaptation therefore reflect capability alignment between agents and engineering subtasks rather than a
ranking of foundation models themselves.
The results support the combined heterogeneous-backbone and role-specific adaptation design over uniformly assigning
one hosted model to all roles. Figure 3 shows that the topology and specification adapters converge faster than the visual
adapter under the reported SFT metric, consistent with their more structured output spaces.
6.2 Ablation Study
Table 3 evaluates five system variants on the same frozen 82-request split. The untuned condition removes the three
role-specific LoRA adapters; the ChE and visual conditions remove the corresponding model-visible evidence; joint
topology–specification generation removes the independent TopologyIR-to-SpecIR promotion boundary; and the
no-Debug condition disables bounded repair.
Ablation observations.Removing role-specific adaptation reduces Workflow Success from 91.5% to 36.6%, with
larger losses in SC and CC than in UC, showing that stream identity and directed port binding are more demanding than
equipment recognition. Removing model-visible ChE knowledge leaves limited local structural overlap but yields no
workflow-successful request, because unit, component, phase, property-package, specification, and initialization choices
must remain jointly compatible. Removing PFD evidence produces the largest SC drop, from 0.791 to 0.078, reflecting
the role of arrows, branches, merges, and recycle loops in stream reconstruction. Joint topology–specification generation
reduces Workflow Success to 30.5%, supporting independent TopologyIR promotion before numerical specification.
Disabling Debug replay reduces Workflow Success to 18.3%, showing that bounded stage-specific repair is integral to
the complete workflow.
8

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
This observation is consistent with the audit that 75 of 82 cases required at least one debugging interaction, demonstrating
that iterative diagnosis is intrinsic to practical process-model construction.
7 Discussion and Limitations
Engineering insight.CRAFTS reflects a central principle of chemical-process modeling: executable flowsheets emerge
from coordinated engineering stages rather than a single generation step. The larger improvements in SC and CC than in
UC indicate that the primary challenge is not recognizing individual equipment types, but preserving relational process
structure. In equation-oriented simulation, valid models require consistent stream identity, directional port connectivity,
compatible property domains, and numerically meaningful specifications across the entire flowsheet. These results
suggest that process-model intelligence depends strongly on maintaining structured engineering relations rather than
only recovering isolated process entities.
Why artifact-based agents work.The effectiveness of CRAFTS arises from separating flexible LLM-based reasoning
from deterministic engineering execution. Specialized agents handle stage-specific decisions, while typed artifacts
preserve explicit engineering states across topology construction, specification closure, diagnosis, and execution. Unlike
free-form agent communication, these artifacts provide a shared and inspectable state that allows deterministic gates to
validate structural, physical, and numerical consistency before information propagates downstream. Bounded repair
then revises the responsible modeling layer using validated intermediate states rather than regenerating the entire model.
This design matches the iterative workflow used by chemical engineers, where flowsheet structure, numerical closure,
and solver behavior are progressively refined through diagnosis and correction.
Limitations and future extensions.The current evaluation focuses on ChE modeling tasks within the verified IDAES
capability surface represented by OpenIDAES-450. Extending CRAFTS to broader process families, additional property
models, and more diverse optimization settings remains an important direction. The current benchmark also emphasizes
auditable process-model construction; future work can investigate larger-scale industrial flowsheets, richer multimodal
inputs, and adaptive knowledge resources. The artifact and execution traces introduced by CRAFTS provide a foundation
for such extensions.
8 Conclusion
We presented CRAFTS, a locally deployable LLM multi-agent system for constructing executable chemical-process
models from underspecified requests. Through seven role-adaptive agents and deterministic workflow nodes, CRAFTS
transforms natural-language and PFD evidence into typed VisualGraphIR, TopologyIR, SpecIR, BuildPlan, SolveReport,
and optional optimization artifacts, with engineering gates enforcing structural, thermodynamic, numerical, and
execution contracts.
CRAFTS targets equation- and code-oriented chemical-process modeling over the open IDAES/Pyomo substrate,
exposing process structure, equations, constraints, DoF, solver diagnostics, and optimization controls as inspectable
program objects. On the frozen 82-request OpenIDAES-450 split, CRAFTS achieves 91.5% Workflow Success and
UC/SC/CC macro F1 scores of 0.815/0.791/0.782, obtaining the best observed results among the evaluated architecture,
orchestration, and uniform-model controls under the shared workflow. These results demonstrate the potential of ChE-
informed, locally deployable LLM collaboration as an effective and auditable approach for executable chemical-process
model construction.
9

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
A Role-Specific Fine-Tuning Details
Only the Visual Descriptor, Topology Agent, and Specification Agent use role-specific LoRA adapters; the other
four roles use ordinary Qwen. The frozen 82-case benchmark is excluded from SFT, prompt construction, and
the ChE knowledge base. The complementary 368 cases supply the training evidence and transferable engineering
guidance. Controlled transformations yield 5,000/1,000/1,000 train, validation, and test records for each text adapter and
1,033/238/240 multimodal records for the visual adapter. These are role-level records rather than additional benchmark
cases.
Fine-tuned role Backbone and adapter Supervised contract Epochs Steps
Visual Descriptor Qwen3-VL-8B-Instruct +
LoRA
Raster PFD and role prompt to validated
VisualGraphIR with equipment, labels, directions,
branches, and recycle cues
3 732
Topology Agent Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-
Instruct + LoRA
Normalized request, typed visual evidence, and ChE
guidance to candidate TopologyIR with units, ports,
arcs, packages, and terminals
2 1,250
Specification Agent Qwen2.5-Coder-7B-
Instruct + LoRA
Accepted TopologyIR and numerical evidence to
SpecIR with targets, values, units, provenance, fix
intent, and solve intent
2 1,250
Table 4: Role-specific fine-tuning configuration. Adapters are optimized independently because the three roles expose
different schemas and validation surfaces. Steps are optimizer steps from the frozen training traces.
A.1 Software, Hardware, and Promotion
The frozen jobs use Python 3.10.20, PyTorch 2.6.0 with CUDA 12.4, Transformers 5.7.0, PEFT 0.19.1, Tokenizers
0.22.2, and Safetensors 0.7.0. The Visual Descriptor additionally uses bitsandbytes 0.49.2 for four-bit NF4 loading,
Accelerate 1.13.0 for device placement, Pillow 12.2.0, and NumPy 2.2.6. Training and local inference run on NVIDIA
A40 GPUs. PEFT 0.19.1 is recorded in every adapter; the remaining pins were reconstructed from the persistent
interpreter on 2026-07-22 because the original runs did not retain a complete transitive lock file.
Checkpoint promotion follows the artifact contract of each role rather than training loss alone. VisualGraphIR, Topolo-
gyIR, and SpecIR checkpoints must pass their respective schema and engineering gates. Figure 3 reports held-out SFT
target-token probability over normalized optimizer steps; solid curves aggregate the multi-seed experiments and shaded
regions show their 95% confidence intervals.
10

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
B Web Interface and Audited Case Demonstrations
B.1 Web Interface Demonstration
Figure 4 shows the local browser interface used to inspect a saved NGCC trajectory. The interface exposes the user
request and inputs, saved runs, ordered stage status, source PFD, and the sanitized artifact selected for inspection. It
reads persisted run records and does not modify model-visible context, execution, or scoring.
Figure 4: Web interface demonstration for a saved NGCC trajectory. Request controls and the run list appear at left;
stage status, source PFD, and selected artifact details appear at right. The screenshot documents the interaction and
audit surfaces only; benchmark results use the frozen artifacts described in the main paper.
11

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
B.2 Audited Case Demonstrations
The following five demonstrations reproduce frozen, artifact-linked trajectories from the held-out evaluation. Each trace
preserves the request, role handoffs, typed artifacts, deterministic gates, execution report, and Debug state from one run.
They illustrate system behavior and do not change the fixed-denominator results reported in the main text.
HDA Flash
HDA flash: complete interaction trace
ChE-knowledge-informed LangGraph trajectory
LangGraph collaboration profile(to Audit report):
Input Understanding, Intent, Visual, Topology, Specification, deterministic validation, initialization, solve, and reporting form one artifact-consistent trajectory.
Text roles use medium reasoning and the Visual Descriptor uses low reasoning. Five scoped model-agent calls generate 15 visibility-audit events, comprising
five each for prepared calls, responses, and finalized calls, with zero boundary errors. The Debug supervisor is armed before Stage 1. All five role outputs are
accepted on attempt 0 with no schema repair, fallback, or Debug replay; the deterministic solve reaches the report boundary.
Stage 1: Input Understanding: preserve requirements, relations, and negations
Root User(to Input Understanding): Build an HDA hydrodealkylation flowsheet with feed mixing, heating, reaction, flash separation, purge, compression,
and vapor recycle. Use the compact flash configuration without a downstream distillation column.
Input Understanding(to Intent Router):
Normalize the task as build_and_solve in the HDA hydrodealkylation domain. Required features are feed_mixing, heater, reactor,
flash_separator, purge, compressor, vapor_recycle, and compact_flash_configuration; the negated feature is distillation_column.
Record the six directed relations: feed mixing feeds the heater, the heater feeds the reactor, the reactor feeds the flash, the flash vapor feeds both compressor
and purge, and the compressor recycles to feed mixing. Record the bounded assumption that standard HDA connections fill details absent from the request, no
unresolved ambiguity,needs_clarification=false, and confidence 0.95. The first structured role output passes the contract.
Stage 2: Intent: recover the ChE process boundary and downstream obligations
Intent Router(to ChE evidence / Visual Descriptor):
Interpret the request as HDA Flash in the reaction_separation family with confidence 1.0 while preserving the explicit no-distillation boundary. The
ChE interpretation requires feed mixing, reaction preheating, hydrodealkylation, vapor–liquid separation, a purge, recompression, vapor recycle, and a
separate benzene-rich liquid path. The first structured role output passes the contract.
Stage 3: Visual evidence: translate the PFD into an inspectable observation
ChE evidence coordinator(to Visual Descriptor):
Provide the process request together with authoritative HDA process documentation as a role-scoped engineering evidence packet. It covers visible equipment
labels, stream directions, the vapor-recycle cue, the purge branch, the liquid-product path, and operating annotations. Only the Visual Descriptor receives the
raster and its role-specific ChE guidance; the image is process evidence, not an evaluator topology or executable implementation.
Visual Descriptor(to VisualGraphIR Validator / Topology Agent):
Act as a modeling-assistance perception adapter upstream of topology synthesis. Convert the raster PFD into a typed visual record of visi-
ble equipment, label text, arrow direction, products, branches, recycle cues, confidence, evidence links, and uncertainty. Do not independently
choose IDAES property packages, ports, specifications, or executable model code. The Topology Agent will combine this validated observa-
tion with routed ChE evidence and simulator capability constraints. The promoted artifact contains 12 visual nodes and 12 directed edges:
nodes I101,I102,M101,H101,R101,F101,S101,C101,F102,P101,P102,P103 and edges I101->M101, I102->M101, M101->H101, H101->R101,
R101->F101, F101->S101, S101->P103, S101->C101, C101->M101 (recycle), F101->F102, F102->P101, and F102->P102. It also reads the two feed
conditions, heater/reactor/flash labels, 20% purge, compressor pressure, second-flash conditions, and benzene, toluene, and purge products. There are no
uncertainty entries. A manuscript rendering of the actual JSON is:
{
"schema_version": "visual_graph_ir/2",
"nodes": [
{"visual_id":"M101", "label_text":"M101",
"equipment_class_guess":"Mixer", "bbox":[0.18,0.4,0.3,0.6],
"confidence_0_1":1.0,
"evidence_ref":"Triangular mixer icon with label M101"},
],
"edges": [
{"visual_edge_id":"e09", "source_visual_id":"C101",
"destination_visual_id":"M101", "label_text":"",
"direction_confidence_0_1":1.0, "is_recycle_guess":true,
"evidence_ref":"Arrow from C101 back to M101"}
],
"uncertainties": []
}
The full JSON additionally retains bounding boxes, all feed/product boundary nodes, every evidence reference, and the remaining ten directed edges.
VisualGraphIR Validator(to Topology Agent):
Validate schema, unique visual identifiers, normalized bounding boxes, edge endpoints, and evidence boundary. Accept the first Visual Descriptor output with
zero canonicalizations and no text-only fallback.
12

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
Stage 4: Topology: combine observations with ChE and simulator constraints
Topology Agent(to Topology Validator / Prebuilder):
Fuse the typed visual record with HDA ChE constraints and emit seven IDAES unit records, all on BTHM_params: M101 Mixer (toluene feed, hydrogen
feed, and vapor recycle), H101 Heater (reactor preheater), R101 CSTR (HDA reactor with reaction_params), F101 Flash (noncondensable/liquid
split), S101 Splitter (purge and recycle), C101 PressureChanger (isothermal recycle compressor), and F102 Flash (benzene-rich product flash). Emit
the seven exact stream endpoints: s03 M101.outlet->H101.inlet ; s04 H101.outlet->R101.inlet ; s05 R101.outlet->F101.inlet ;
s06 F101.vap_outlet->S101.inlet ; s08 S101.recycle->C101.inlet ; s09 C101.outlet->M101.vapor_recycle ; and s10
F101.liq_outlet->F102.inlet. The first typed output passes without fallback.
Stage 5: Specification: close operating choices and degrees of freedom
Topology Validator / Prebuilder(to Specification Agent):
Check unit and package surfaces, endpoints, ports, terminal streams, and construction compatibility. The promoted TopologyIR passes with exactly 7 units, 7
arcs, and zero errors.
Specification Agent(to DOF Checker):
Emit all 16 grounded SpecIR entries one-to-one. The provenance markerChE-agent/DoF-validateddenotes a Specification Agent proposal accepted by the de-
terministic DoF gate.Unit configuration (5): R101.conversion = 0.75 dimensionless (toluene conversion target; ChE-agent/DoF-validated);R101.heat_
duty[0] = 0 W (adiabatic reactor duty; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); F101.deltaP[0] = 0 Pa (first flash pressure drop; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); S101.
split_fraction[0, ’purge’] = 0.2 dimensionless (purge split fraction; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); and F102.deltaP[0] = -200000 Pa (second
flash pressure drop; ChE-agent/DoF-validated).Stream configuration (11): M101.toluene_feed.flow_mol_phase_comp[0, ’Liq’, ’toluene’]
= 0.3 mol/s (toluene feed molar flow; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); M101.hydrogen_feed.flow_mol_phase_comp[0, ’Vap’, ’hydrogen’] = 0.3
mol/s (hydrogen feed molar flow; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); M101.hydrogen_feed.flow_mol_phase_comp[0, ’Vap’, ’methane’] = 0.02 mol/s
(methane impurity in hydrogen feed; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); M101.toluene_feed.temperature[0] = 303.2 K (toluene feed temperature; ChE-
agent/DoF-validated); M101.hydrogen_feed.temperature[0] = 303.2 K (hydrogen feed temperature; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); M101.toluene_
feed.pressure[0] = 350000 Pa (toluene feed pressure; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); M101.hydrogen_feed.pressure[0] = 350000 Pa (hydrogen feed
pressure; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); H101.outlet.temperature[0] = 600 K (reactor preheat target; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); F101.vap_outlet.
temperature[0] = 325 K (first flash vapor temperature; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); C101.outlet.pressure[0] = 350000 Pa (recycle compressor
outlet pressure; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); and F102.vap_outlet.temperature[0] = 375 K (second flash vapor temperature; ChE-agent/DoF-validated).
No assignment is replaced by a count; the first structured output passes without fallback.
DOF Checker(to BuildPlan Compiler):
Pass the deterministic consistency gate with zero errors and zero warnings, 16 specifications, and expected steady-state DoF 0.
Stage 6: Build and initialize the accepted white-box model
BuildPlan Compiler(to Initialization / Native Solver):
Compile the promoted TopologyIR and SpecIR into a hermetic JSON BuildPlan. Retain the seven units, seven arcs, benzene/toluene/hydrogen/methane
components in liquid and vapor phases, the HDA property/reaction-package surface, terminal feeds M101.toluene_feed and M101.hydrogen_feed,
and terminal products S101.purge, F102.vap_outlet, and F102.liq_outlet. Declare SequentialDecomposition in the order
M101,H101,R101,F101,S101,C101,F102, withH101.inletas the recycle tear destination.
Stage 7: Solve, inspect diagnostics, repair, and optimize only when eligible
Native Solver(to Failure Router / Report):
Complete the IDAES HDA solve with pass=true, termination optimal, final DoF 0, no error, and 12 persisted stream records. F102 vapor and liquid
products are both 375 K and approximately 150 kPa. The liquid product contains 0.06262 mol/s liquid benzene and 0.03226 mol/s liquid toluene; the vapor
product contains 0.14198 mol/s vapor benzene and 0.03026 mol/s vapor toluene. The purge is 325 K and approximately 350 kPa.
Debug Supervisor audit (standby)(to Failure Router / Report):
No fault is routed to Debug, so no diagnosis, repair artifact, or replay is generated. The supervisor remains armed from before Stage 1 through terminal
acceptance.
Failure Router(to Optimization Agent / Report):
Accept the passing TopologyIR, SpecIR, DoF, and native-solve reports, close the bounded repair branch, and pass the accepted simulator state to Optimization
only when the request makes that role eligible.
Optimization Agent(to Deterministic runner / Report):
Optimization is not invoked because the current request is build-and-solve only; persist the not-invoked state and make no design-optimum claim.
IDAES FV exporter(to Web / manuscript report):
After solve and any eligible optimization, export the same-run flowsheet visualization with 22 FV cells. Retain the ChE process evidence, accepted TopologyIR
sketch, FV graph, and terminal numerical evidence for this same LangGraph trajectory.
13

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
Figure 5: HDA flash collaboration audit bundle. The compact flash and recycle boundary is kept separate from HDA
distillation. Panels show (A) process evidence, (B) accepted TopologyIR, (C) the IDAES flowsheet view, and (D)
terminal numerical evidence from the same trajectory.
14

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
HDA Distillation
HDA distillation—complete interaction trace
ChE-knowledge-informed LangGraph trajectory
LangGraph collaboration profile(to Case report):
Input Understanding, Intent, Visual, Topology, Specification, deterministic validation, execution, and conditional Debug/Optimization roles form one
artifact-consistent trajectory. Role reasoning is bounded by medium. The visibility gateway records 5 scoped model-agent calls and 15 visibility-audit events
with zero boundary errors. Structured-output repairs=0; Debug replays=0. The Debug supervisor is armed before Stage 1. The deterministic execution returns
solvedwith final acceptance at the report boundary.
Stage 1: Input Understanding: preserve requirements, relations, and negations
Root User(to Input Understanding): Build an HDA hydrodealkylation flowsheet with feed mixing, heating, reaction, flash separation, purge, compression,
and vapor recycle. Route the flash liquid through the transfer and preheat section to a distillation column for benzene and toluene recovery.
Input Understanding(to Intent Router):
Normalize the request as build_and_solve in HDA hydrodealkylation. Required features: feed_mixing; heater; reactor; flash_separator; purge;
compressor; vapor_recycle; liquid_preheater; distillation_column. Negated features: none. Directed relations: feed_mixing feeds heater;
heater feeds reactor; reactor feeds flash_separator; flash_separator vapor_outlet_feeds compressor; compressor recycles_to feed_mixing; flash_separator
liquid_outlet_feeds liquid_preheater; liquid_preheater feeds distillation_column. Assumptions: Standard HDA topology assumed: reactor effluent goes to
flash; vapor is compressed and recycled; liquid goes to distillation.; ambiguities: none; clarification required=False; confidence 0.95.
Stage 2: Intent: recover the ChE process boundary and downstream obligations
Intent Router(to ChE evidence coordinator / Visual Descriptor):
Interpret the request as HDA Distillation in the distillation domain. Route the required equipment and process features—feed_mixing; heater; reactor;
flash_separator; purge; compressor; vapor_recycle; liquid_preheater; distillation_column— and directed ChE relations—feed_mixing
feeds heater; heater feeds reactor; reactor feeds flash_separator; flash_separator vapor_outlet_feeds compressor; compressor recycles_to feed_mixing;
flash_separator liquid_outlet_feeds liquid_preheater; liquid_preheater feeds distillation_column—to the downstream roles. Preserve explicit negations and
bounded assumptions; confidence 1.
Stage 3: Visual evidence: translate the PFD into an inspectable observation
ChE evidence coordinator(to Visual Descriptor):
Provide a role-scoped engineering evidence packet from the process request and authoritative process documentation. It contains equipment functions, visible
labels, material/energy-flow direction, recycle or branch cues, operating semantics, and an explicit uncertainty boundary. LangGraph exposes this ChE
evidence to the perception role without adding executable implementation details.
Visual Descriptor(to VisualGraphIR Validator / Topology Agent):
Act as the modeling-assistance perception adapter. The validated visual record has 14 nodes and 14 edges. Complete node inventory: M101=Mixer;
H101=Heater; R101=CSTR; F101=Flash; S101=Splitter; C101=PressureChanger; Translator=Translator; H102=Heater; D101=TrayColumn; Feed_H2_
CH4=External Feed; Feed_Toluene=External Feed; Purge=External Product; Benzene=External Product; Toluene=External Product. Complete directed-
edge inventory: s03: Feed_H2_CH4→M101; s04: Feed_Toluene→M101; s05: M101→H101; s06: H101→R101; s07: R101→F101; s08: F101→S101;
s09: C101→M101 (recycle cue); s10a: F101→Translator; s10b: Translator→H102; s11: H102→D101; s12: S101→Purge; s13: S101→C101;
s14:D101→Benzene;s15:D101→Toluene. Visible text labels: none. Uncertainties: []. Observation excerpt:
{
"schema_version": "visual_graph_ir/2",
"nodes": [
{
"visual_id": "M101",
"label_text": "M101",
"equipment_class_guess": "Mixer",
"bbox": [
0.12,
0.35,
0.24,
0.5
],
"confidence_0_1": 0.95,
"evidence_ref": "triangle mixer symbol with three inlet arrows"
}
],
"edges": [
{
"visual_edge_id": "s03",
"source_visual_id": "Feed_H2_CH4",
"destination_visual_id": "M101",
"label_text": "",
"direction_confidence_0_1": 0.95,
"is_recycle_guess": false,
"evidence_ref": "arrow from feed box to mixer"
}
],
"uncertainties": []
}
15

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
The Topology Agent combines this typed observation with routed ChE constraints and simulator capabilities; visual perception alone does not choose the
executable flowsheet.
VisualGraphIR Validator(to Topology Agent):
Validate the visual schema, unique node/edge identifiers, normalized geometry, endpoint closure, evidence references, and uncertainty boundary before
topology synthesis.
Stage 4: Topology: combine observations with ChE and simulator constraints
Topology Agent(to Topology Validator / Prebuilder):
Combine the typed visual record with routed ChE constraints and simulator capabilities. Emit all 9 typed units: M101 Mixer (ChE role mix toluene
feed, hydrogen feed, and vapor recycle, package BTHM_params, stage recycle_section); H101 Heater (ChE role reactor preheater, package BTHM_
params, stage recycle_section); R101 CSTR (ChE role HDA reactor, packageBTHM_params, stage recycle_section); F101 Flash (ChE role separate
non-condensibles from liquid benzene/toluene, package BTHM_params, stage recycle_section); S101 Splitter (ChE role split F101 vapor into purge and
recycle, package BTHM_params, stage recycle_section); C101 PressureChanger (ChE role compress vapor recycle before M101, package BTHM_params,
stage recycle_section); translator Translator (ChE role map HDA liquid to two-component BTX package, package BTHM_params_to_BT_params,
stage distillation_section); H102 Heater (ChE role condition BTX liquid stream before distillation, package BT_params, stage distillation_
section); D101 TrayColumn (ChE role benzene/toluene distillation column, package BT_params, stage distillation_section). Property/reaction
package surface: BTHM_params (components=[benzene, toluene, hydrogen, methane]; phases=[Liq, Vap]; scope=[M101, H101, R101, F101, S101, C101,
translator.inlet]); BT_params (components=[benzene, toluene]; phases=[Liq, Vap]; scope=[translator.outlet, H102, D101]). Emit all 9 exact stream endpoints:
s03: M101.outlet→H101.inlet ; s04: H101.outlet→R101.inlet ; s05: R101.outlet→F101.inlet ; s06: F101.vap_outlet→S101.
inlet; s08: S101.recycle→C101.inlet ; s09: C101.outlet→M101.vapor_recycle ; s10: F101.liq_outlet→translator.inlet ; s11_
pre_column: translator.outlet→H102.inlet ; s11: H102.outlet→D101.feed . Terminal feeds: M101.toluene_feed; M101.hydrogen_
feed; terminal products:S101.purge;D101.condenser.distillate;D101.reboiler.bottoms.
Stage 5: Specification: close operating choices and degrees of freedom
Topology Validator / Prebuilder(to Specification Agent):
The typed unit, package, configuration, port, arc, terminal, and construction checks pass for the accepted TopologyIR; only the accepted topology advances.
Specification Agent(to DOF Checker):
Emit all 19 persisted SpecIR assignments one-to-one. The provenance markerChE-agent/DoF-validateddenotes a Specification Agent proposal ac-
cepted by the deterministic DoF gate.Unit configuration (8): R101.conversion = 0.75 dimensionless (toluene conversion target; ChE-agent/DoF-
validated); R101.heat_duty[0] = 0 W (adiabatic reactor duty; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); F101.deltaP[0] = 0 Pa (flash pressure drop; ChE-agent/DoF-
validated); S101.split_fraction[0, ’purge’] = 0.2 dimensionless (purge split fraction; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); H102.deltaP[0] = -200000
Pa (BTX heater pressure drop; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); D101.condenser.reflux_ratio = 0.5 dimensionless (column reflux ratio; ChE-agent/DoF-
validated); D101.reboiler.boilup_ratio = 0.5 dimensionless (column boilup ratio; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); D101.condenser.condenser_
pressure = 150000 Pa (column condenser pressure; ChE-agent/DoF-validated).Stream configuration (11): M101.toluene_feed.flow_mol_phase_
comp[0, ’Liq’, ’toluene’] = 0.3 mol/s (toluene feed molar flow; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); M101.hydrogen_feed.flow_mol_phase_comp[
0, ’Vap’, ’hydrogen’] = 0.3 mol/s (hydrogen feed molar flow; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); M101.hydrogen_feed.flow_mol_phase_comp[0,
’Vap’, ’methane’] = 0.02 mol/s (methane impurity in hydrogen feed; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); M101.toluene_feed.temperature[0] = 303.2 K
(toluene feed temperature; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); M101.hydrogen_feed.temperature[0] = 303.2 K (hydrogen feed temperature; ChE-agent/DoF-
validated); M101.toluene_feed.pressure[0] = 350000 Pa (toluene feed pressure; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); M101.hydrogen_feed.pressure[
0] = 350000 Pa (hydrogen feed pressure; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); H101.outlet.temperature[0] = 600 K (reactor preheat target; ChE-agent/DoF-
validated); F101.vap_outlet.temperature[0] = 325 K (first flash vapor temperature; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); C101.outlet.pressure[0] =
350000 Pa (recycle compressor outlet pressure; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); H102.outlet.temperature[0] = 375 K (BTX column feed conditioning
target; ChE-agent/DoF-validated). No assignment is replaced by a count.
DOF Checker(to BuildPlan Compiler):
Validate target existence, compatibility, duplicate/conflicting fixes, terminal closure, and expected steady-state DoF. The promoted SpecIR and deterministic
DoF report pass before compilation.
Stage 6: Build and initialize the accepted white-box model
BuildPlan Compiler(to Initialization / Native Solver):
Compile the hermetic BuildPlan from the accepted TopologyIR and SpecIR. Initialization contract: solve order=[M101, H101, R101, F101, S101, C101,
translator, H102, D101]; strategy=SequentialDecomposition over recycle section, then add/initialize TrayColumn. Recycle/tear contract: []. Solve contract:
native_solve_disabled=false; expected_dof=0.
Stage 7: Solve, inspect diagnostics, repair, and optimize only when eligible
Native Solver(to Failure Router / Report):
Persist pass=True, termination optimal, final DoF 0, stage steady_state_solver, and no terminal error. Representative same-run stream/product
quantities: s11 [flow_mol=0.267119; temperature=375; pressure=150,000; mole_frac_comp: benzene=0.765945, toluene=0.234055]; H102_outlet_to_
column_feed [flow_mol=0.267119; temperature=375; pressure=150,000; mole_frac_comp: benzene=0.765945, toluene=0.234055]; COL1_condenser_
distillate [flow_mol=0.161969; temperature=368.929; pressure=150,000; mole_frac_comp: benzene=0.894916, toluene=0.105084]; COL1_reboiler_
bottoms [flow_mol=0.10515; temperature=377.296; pressure=150,000; mole_frac_comp: benzene=0.566774, toluene=0.433226]. Source evidence is
reported as the accepted output of the native execution node.
Debug Supervisor audit (standby)(to Failure Router / Report):
No fault was routed to Debug; no diagnosis, repair artifact, or replay was generated. The supervisor remained armed from before Stage 1 through terminal
acceptance.
Failure Router(to Optimization Agent / Report):
Read the structured topology, specification, DoF, and accepted execution reports. Close the bounded repair branch, then pass the accepted simulator state to
Optimization only when the request makes that role eligible.
16

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
Optimization Agent(to Deterministic runner / Report):
Optimization was not invoked because the normalized intentbuild_and_solvedoes not request a separate design-optimization stage.
IDAES FV exporter(to Web / manuscript report):
After solve and any eligible optimization, export the same-run flowsheet visualization with 26 FV cells. Retain the ChE process evidence, accepted topology,
FV graph, and terminal numerical evidence as one LangGraph trajectory.
17

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
Figure 6: HDA distillation collaboration audit bundle. Panels show (A) process evidence, (B) accepted TopologyIR, (C)
the IDAES flowsheet view, and (D) terminal numerical evidence from the same trajectory.
18

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
Methanol Recycle
Methanol recycle—complete interaction trace
ChE-knowledge-informed LangGraph trajectory
LangGraph collaboration profile(to Case report):
Input Understanding, Intent, Visual, Topology, Specification, deterministic validation, execution, and conditional Debug/Optimization roles form one
artifact-consistent trajectory. Role reasoning is bounded by medium. The visibility gateway records 5 scoped model-agent calls and 15 visibility-audit events
with zero boundary errors. Structured-output repairs=0; Debug replays=0. The Debug supervisor is armed before Stage 1. The deterministic execution returns
solvedwith final acceptance at the report boundary.
Stage 1: Input Understanding: preserve requirements, relations, and negations
Root User(to Input Understanding): Build a methanol-synthesis flowsheet from hydrogen and carbon monoxide with feed mixing, compression, heating,
reaction, cooling, flash separation, purge, and vapor recycle to the reactor feed.
Input Understanding(to Intent Router):
Normalize the request as build_and_solve in methanol_synthesis. Required features: feed_mixing; compressor; heater; reactor; cooler; flash_
separator; purge_stream; vapor_recycle_loop. Negated features: none. Directed relations: fresh_feed feeds feed_mixer; feed_mixer feeds compressor;
compressor feeds heater; heater feeds reactor; reactor feeds cooler; cooler feeds flash_separator; flash_vapor_outlet splits_to purge_stream; flash_vapor_outlet
splits_to recycle_compressor; recycle_compressor feeds feed_mixer. Assumptions: Standard methanol synthesis topology assumed: fresh feed mixes with
recycle before compression.; ambiguities: none; clarification required=False; confidence 0.95.
Stage 2: Intent: recover the ChE process boundary and downstream obligations
Intent Router(to ChE evidence coordinator / Visual Descriptor):
Interpret the request as Methanol Recycle in the reaction domain. Route the required equipment and process features—feed_mixing; compressor; heater;
reactor; cooler; flash_separator; purge_stream; vapor_recycle_loop— and directed ChE relations—fresh_feed feeds feed_mixer; feed_mixer
feeds compressor; compressor feeds heater; heater feeds reactor; reactor feeds cooler; cooler feeds flash_separator; flash_vapor_outlet splits_to purge_stream;
flash_vapor_outlet splits_to recycle_compressor; recycle_compressor feeds feed_mixer—to the downstream roles. Preserve explicit negations and bounded
assumptions; confidence 1.
Stage 3: Visual evidence: translate the PFD into an inspectable observation
ChE evidence coordinator(to Visual Descriptor):
Provide a role-scoped engineering evidence packet from the process request and authoritative process documentation. It contains equipment functions, visible
labels, material/energy-flow direction, recycle or branch cues, operating semantics, and an explicit uncertainty boundary. LangGraph exposes this ChE
evidence to the perception role without adding executable implementation details.
Visual Descriptor(to VisualGraphIR Validator / Topology Agent):
Act as the modeling-assistance perception adapter. The validated visual record has 13 nodes and 13 edges. Complete node inventory: H2_feed=Feed;
CO_feed=Feed; M101=Mixer; M102=Mixer; C101=Compressor; H101=Heater; R101=StoichiometricReactor; T101=Turbine; H102=Heater; F101=Flash;
S101=Splitter; EXHAUST=Product; CH3OH_product=Product. Complete directed-edge inventory: s01: H2_feed→M101; s02: CO_feed→M101; s03:
M101→M102; s04: M102→C101; s05: C101→H101; s06: H101→R101; s07: R101→T101; s08: T101→H102; s09: H102→F101; s10: F101→S101;
s11:S101→EXHAUST;s12:S101→M102(recycle cue);s13:F101→CH3OH_product. Visible text labels: none. Uncertainties: []. Observation excerpt:
{
"schema_version": "visual_graph_ir/2",
"nodes": [
{
"visual_id": "H2_feed",
"label_text": "H2, 20 C, 30 bar",
"equipment_class_guess": "Feed",
"bbox": [
0.0,
0.15,
0.12,
0.3
],
"confidence_0_1": 0.95,
"evidence_ref": "Leftmost labeled arrow with H2 specification"
}
],
"edges": [
{
"visual_edge_id": "s01",
"source_visual_id": "H2_feed",
"destination_visual_id": "M101",
"label_text": "",
"direction_confidence_0_1": 0.95,
"is_recycle_guess": false,
"evidence_ref": "Arrow from H2_feed to M101"
}
],
"uncertainties": []
}
The Topology Agent combines this typed observation with routed ChE constraints and simulator capabilities; visual perception alone does not choose the
executable flowsheet.
19

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
VisualGraphIR Validator(to Topology Agent):
Validate the visual schema, unique node/edge identifiers, normalized geometry, endpoint closure, evidence references, and uncertainty boundary before
topology synthesis.
Stage 4: Topology: combine observations with ChE and simulator constraints
Topology Agent(to Topology Validator / Prebuilder):
Combine the typed visual record with routed ChE constraints and simulator capabilities. Emit all 13 typed units: H2 Feed (ChE role hydrogen feed, package
thermo_params_vapor, stage feed_section); CO Feed (ChE role carbon monoxide feed, package thermo_params_vapor, stage feed_section);
M101 Mixer (ChE role mix H2 and CO feeds, package thermo_params_vapor, stage feed_section); M102 Mixer (ChE role mix fresh syngas with
recycle vapor, package thermo_params_vapor, stage recycle_section); C101 Compressor (ChE role compress mixed syngas, package thermo_
params_vapor, stage reaction_section); H101 Heater (ChE role preheat reactor feed, package thermo_params_vapor, stage reaction_section);
R101 StoichiometricReactor (ChE role methanol synthesis reactor, package thermo_params_vapor, stage reaction_section); T101 Turbine (ChE
role expand reactor effluent, package thermo_params_vapor, stage recovery_section); H102 Heater (ChE role cool product recovery feed, package
thermo_params_vapor, stage recovery_section); F101 Flash (ChE role recover liquid methanol from vapor, package thermo_params_VLE, stage
recovery_section); S101 Splitter (ChE role split flash vapor into purge and recycle, package thermo_params_vapor, stage recycle_section);
EXHAUST Product (ChE role purge gas product, package thermo_params_vapor, stage product_section); CH3OH Product (ChE role liquid methanol
product, package thermo_params_VLE, stage product_section). Property/reaction package surface: thermo_params_VLE (components=[H2, CO,
CH3OH, CH4]; phases=[Liq, Vap]; scope=[F101, CH3OH]); thermo_params_vapor (components=[H2, CO, CH3OH, CH4]; phases=[Vap]; scope=[H2,
CO, M101, M102, C101, H101, R101, T101, H102, S101, EXHAUST]). Emit all 13 exact stream endpoints: s01: H2.outlet→M101.H2_WGS ; s02: CO.
outlet→M101.CO_WGS ; s03: M101.outlet→M102.feed ; s04: M102.outlet→C101.inlet ; s05: C101.outlet→H101.inlet ; s06: H101.
outlet→R101.inlet ; s07: R101.outlet→T101.inlet ; s08: T101.outlet→H102.inlet ; s09: H102.outlet→F101.inlet ; s10: F101.
vap_outlet→S101.inlet ; s11: S101.recycle→M102.recycle ; s12: S101.purge→EXHAUST.inlet ; s13: F101.liq_outlet→CH3OH.
inlet. Terminal feeds: none; terminal products: none.
Stage 5: Specification: close operating choices and degrees of freedom
Topology Validator / Prebuilder(to Specification Agent):
The typed unit, package, configuration, port, arc, terminal, and construction checks pass for the accepted TopologyIR; only the accepted topology advances.
Specification Agent(to DOF Checker):
Emit all 14 persisted SpecIR assignments one-to-one. The provenance markerChE-agent/DoF-validateddenotes a Specification Agent proposal accepted by the
deterministic DoF gate.Unit configuration (6): R101.co_conversion = 0.75 dimensionless (CO conversion; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); T101.deltaP[
0] = -2000000 Pa (turbine pressure drop; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); T101.efficiency_isentropic[0] = 0.9 dimensionless (turbine isentropic
efficiency; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); F101.deltaP[0] = 0 Pa (flash pressure drop; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); F101.outlet.temperature[0] =
407.15 K (flash outlet temperature; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); S101.split_fraction[0, ’purge’] = 0.9999 dimensionless (purge split fraction;
ChE-agent/DoF-validated).Stream configuration (8): H2.outlet.flow_mol[0] = 637.2 mol/s (hydrogen feed flow; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); CO.
outlet.flow_mol[0] = 316.8 mol/s (carbon monoxide feed flow; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); H2.outlet.pressure[0] = 3000000 Pa (hydrogen
feed pressure; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); CO.outlet.pressure[0] = 3000000 Pa (carbon monoxide feed pressure; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); C101.
outlet.pressure[0] = 5100000 Pa (compressor outlet pressure; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); H101.outlet.temperature[0] = 488.15 K (reactor
feed preheat temperature; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); R101.outlet.temperature[0] = 507.15 K (reactor outlet temperature; ChE-agent/DoF-validated);
H102.outlet.temperature[0]=407.15K (flash feed cooling temperature; ChE-agent/DoF-validated). No assignment is replaced by a count.
DOF Checker(to BuildPlan Compiler):
Validate target existence, compatibility, duplicate/conflicting fixes, terminal closure, and expected steady-state DoF. The promoted SpecIR and deterministic
DoF report pass before compilation.
Stage 6: Build and initialize the accepted white-box model
BuildPlan Compiler(to Initialization / Native Solver):
Compile the hermetic BuildPlan from the accepted TopologyIR and SpecIR. Initialization contract: solve order=[H2, CO, M101, M102, C101,
H101, R101, T101, H102, F101, S101]; strategy=SequentialDecomposition over methanol recycle loop. Recycle/tear contract: []. Solve contract: na-
tive_solve_disabled=false; expected_dof=0.
Stage 7: Solve, inspect diagnostics, repair, and optimize only when eligible
Native Solver(to Failure Router / Report):
Persist pass=True, termination optimal, final DoF 0, stage steady_state_solver, and no terminal error. Representative same-run stream/product
quantities: s10_flash_vapor [flow_mol=336.239; temperature=not recorded; pressure=3.1e+06; enth_mol=-80217.7; mole_frac_comp: H2=0.481811,
CO=0.235553, CH3OH=0.282634, CH4=2.83755e-06]; s11_recycle [flow_mol=0.0336239; temperature=not recorded; pressure=3.1e+06; enth_mol=-
80217.7; mole_frac_comp: H2=0.481811, CO=0.235553, CH3OH=0.282634, CH4=2.83755e-06]; s12_purge [flow_mol=336.206; temperature=not
recorded; pressure=3.1e+06; enth_mol=-80217.7; mole_frac_comp: H2=0.481811, CO=0.235553, CH3OH=0.282634, CH4=2.83755e-06]; s13_methanol_
product [flow_mol=142.584; temperature=not recorded; pressure=3.1e+06; enth_mol=-238,130; mole_frac_comp: H2=1e-08, CO=1e-08, CH3OH=1,
CH4=1e-08]. Source evidence is reported as the accepted output of the native execution node.
Debug Supervisor audit (standby)(to Failure Router / Report):
No fault was routed to Debug; no diagnosis, repair artifact, or replay was generated. The supervisor remained armed from before Stage 1 through terminal
acceptance.
Failure Router(to Optimization Agent / Report):
Read the structured topology, specification, DoF, and accepted execution reports. Close the bounded repair branch, then pass the accepted simulator state to
Optimization only when the request makes that role eligible.
Optimization Agent(to Deterministic runner / Report):
Optimization was not invoked because the normalized intentbuild_and_solvedoes not request a separate design-optimization stage.
20

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
IDAES FV exporter(to Web / manuscript report):
After solve and any eligible optimization, export the same-run flowsheet visualization with 26 FV cells. Retain the ChE process evidence, accepted topology,
FV graph, and terminal numerical evidence as one LangGraph trajectory.
21

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
Figure 7: Methanol recycle collaboration audit bundle. Panels show (A) process evidence, (B) accepted TopologyIR,
(C) the IDAES flowsheet view, and (D) terminal numerical evidence from the same trajectory.
22

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
Membrane Distillation Recirculation
Membrane distillation recirculation: complete interaction trace
ChE-knowledge-informed LangGraph trajectory
LangGraph collaboration profile(to Case report):
Input Understanding, Intent, Visual, Topology, Specification, deterministic validation, execution, and conditional Debug/Optimization roles form one
artifact-consistent trajectory. Role reasoning is bounded by medium. The visibility gateway records 6 scoped model-agent calls and 18 visibility-audit events
with zero boundary errors. Structured-output repairs=0; Debug replays=0. The Debug supervisor is armed before Stage 1. The deterministic execution returns
optimizedwith final acceptance at the report boundary.
Stage 1: Input Understanding: preserve requirements, relations, and negations
Root User(to Input Understanding): Build a WaterTAP direct-contact membrane-distillation flowsheet with feed pumping, heat recovery, brine heating,
the MD unit, concentrate recycle and reject handling, permeate cooling, and a final permeate product. After the zero-DoF steady-state solve, perform the
registered deterministic design optimization and retain its objective, decision variables, bounds, constraints, termination, and terminal metrics in this same run.
Input Understanding(to Intent Router):
Normalize the request as optimize in WaterTAP membrane distillation. Required features: feed_pump; heat_recovery_exchanger; brine_
heater; membrane_distillation_unit; concentrate_recycle; reject_handling; permeate_cooler; permeate_product; deterministi
c_design_optimization. Negated features: none. Directed relations: feed_inlet feeds feed_pump; feed_pump feeds heat_recovery_exchanger_feed_side;
heat_recovery_exchanger_feed_side feeds brine_heater; brine_heater feeds membrane_distillation_unit_feed; membrane_distillation_unit_concentrate
splits_to concentrate_recycle_stream; membrane_distillation_unit_concentrate splits_to reject_stream; concentrate_recycle_stream recycles_to
feed_mixing_point; membrane_distillation_unit_permeate feeds permeate_cooler; permeate_cooler feeds permeate_product. Assumptions: Standard Water-
TAP DCMD topology assumed for component ordering.; Optimization is performed on the same flowsheet instance after initial solve.; ambiguities: none;
clarification required=False; confidence 0.95.
Stage 2: Intent: recover the ChE process boundary and downstream obligations
Intent Router(to ChE evidence coordinator / Visual Descriptor):
Interpret the request as Membrane Distillation in the distillation domain. Route the required equipment and process features, namely feed_
pump; heat_recovery_exchanger; brine_heater; membrane_distillation_unit; concentrate_recycle; reject_handling; permeate_
cooler; permeate_product; deterministic_design_optimization, and directed ChE relations, namely feed_inlet feeds feed_pump; feed_pump
feeds heat_recovery_exchanger_feed_side; heat_recovery_exchanger_feed_side feeds brine_heater; brine_heater feeds membrane_distillation_unit_feed;
membrane_distillation_unit_concentrate splits_to concentrate_recycle_stream; membrane_distillation_unit_concentrate splits_to reject_stream; concen-
trate_recycle_stream recycles_to feed_mixing_point; membrane_distillation_unit_permeate feeds permeate_cooler; permeate_cooler feeds permeate_product,
to the downstream roles. Preserve explicit negations and bounded assumptions; confidence 0.98.
Stage 3: Visual evidence: translate the PFD into an inspectable observation
ChE evidence coordinator(to Visual Descriptor):
Provide a role-scoped engineering evidence packet from the process request and authoritative process documentation. It contains equipment functions, visible
labels, material/energy-flow direction, recycle or branch cues, operating semantics, and an explicit uncertainty boundary. LangGraph exposes this ChE
evidence to the perception role without adding executable implementation details.
Visual Descriptor(to VisualGraphIR Validator / Topology Agent):
Act as the modeling-assistance perception adapter. The validated visual record has 8 nodes and 9 edges. Complete node inventory: Heater=Heater;
Heat_Exchanger=HeatExchanger; Cooler=Heater; MD_Module=MembraneDistillation0D; Make_up_Feed=Feed; Reject_Concentrate=Product;
Permeate=Product; Recycle_Stream=Separator. Complete directed-edge inventory: Make_up_Feed_to_MD_hot_inlet: Make_up_Feed→MD_
Module; MD_hot_outlet_to_Reject_Concentrate: MD_Module→Reject_Concentrate; MD_cold_outlet_to_Heat_Exchanger_hot_
side: MD_Module→Heat_Exchanger; Heat_Exchanger_cold_side_to_Cooler: Heat_Exchanger→Cooler; Cooler_to_MD_cold_inlet:
Cooler→MD_Module; Heat_Exchanger_hot_side_to_Heater: Heat_Exchanger→Heater; Heater_to_MD_hot_inlet: Heater→MD_Module;
MD_cold_outlet_to_Permeate_Separator: MD_Module→Permeate; Recycle_Stream_from_Reject_Concentrate_to_Make_up_Feed:
Reject_Concentrate→Make_up_Feed (recycle cue). Visible text labels: Make-up Feed; Reject Concentrate; Permeate; Recycle Stream; Coolant; Heater;
Heat Exchanger; Cooler; Tf; Tfm; Tp; Cf; Cfm; qf; qm; qp; J. Uncertainties: [{’description’: ’Internal stream splits within MD module are not visible;
permeate and concentrate paths inferred from external outputs.’, ’evidence_ref’: ’No explicit separators shown for permeate/concentrate split within MD
module.’}, {’description’: ’Exact connection point between Cooler output and MD cold inlet is ambiguous due to overlapping arrows.’, ’evidence_ref’: ’Blue
arrows converge near MD cold inlet but lack clear junction point.’}]. Observation excerpt:
23

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
{
"schema_version": "visual_graph_ir/2",
"nodes": [
{
"visual_id": "Heater",
"label_text": "Heater",
"equipment_class_guess": "Heater",
"bbox": [
0.38,
0.12,
0.54,
0.26
],
"confidence_0_1": 0.95,
"evidence_ref": "Top circular unit labeled ’Heater’"
}
],
"edges": [
{
"visual_edge_id": "Make_up_Feed_to_MD_hot_inlet",
"source_visual_id": "Make_up_Feed",
"destination_visual_id": "MD_Module",
"label_text": "",
"direction_confidence_0_1": 0.98,
"is_recycle_guess": false,
"evidence_ref": "Red arrow from ’Make-up Feed’ to MD hot inlet"
}
],
"uncertainties": [
"{’description’: ’Internal stream splits within MD module are not visible; permeate and concentrate paths inferred from external
outputs.’, ’evidence_ref’: ’No explicit separators shown for permeate/concentrate split within MD module.’}",
"{’description’: ’Exact connection point between Cooler output and MD cold inlet is ambiguous due to overlapping arrows.’,
’evidence_ref’: ’Blue arrows converge near MD cold inlet but lack clear junction point.’}"
]
}
The Topology Agent combines this typed observation with routed ChE constraints and simulator capabilities; visual perception alone does not choose the
executable flowsheet.
VisualGraphIR Validator(to Topology Agent):
Validate the visual schema, unique node/edge identifiers, normalized geometry, endpoint closure, evidence references, and uncertainty boundary before
topology synthesis.
Stage 4: Topology: combine observations with ChE and simulator constraints
Topology Agent(to Topology Validator / Prebuilder):
Combine the typed visual record with routed ChE constraints and simulator capabilities. Emit all 13 typed units: feed Feed (ChE role seawater
makeup feed, package seawater, stage feed); pump_feed Pump (ChE role raise makeup feed pressure before mixing, package seawater, stage
hot_loop); mixer Mixer (ChE role mix makeup feed with concentrated brine recycle, package seawater, stage hot_loop); hx HeatExchanger
(ChE role recover heat from cold-loop outlet into hot-loop feed, package seawater, stage heat_recovery); pump_brine Pump (ChE role pressur-
ize brine loop before heater, package seawater, stage hot_loop); heater Heater (ChE role heat hot-side MD inlet stream, package seawater, stage
thermal); MD MembraneDistillation0D (ChE role direct-contact membrane distillation module, package seawater, stage separation); separator_
concentrate Separator (ChE role split MD hot outlet into reject and recycle, package seawater, stage hot_loop); reject Product (ChE role
concentrated brine reject, package seawater, stage product); chiller Heater (ChE role cool cold-loop stream before MD cold inlet, package
permeate_water, stage cold_loop); separator_permeate Separator (ChE role split cold-loop outlet into product permeate and recycle loop, pack-
age permeate_water, stage cold_loop); pump_permeate Pump (ChE role circulate cold-loop stream through chiller, package permeate_water,
stage cold_loop); permeate Product (ChE role distilled permeate product, package permeate_water, stage product). Property/reaction pack-
age surface: permeate_water (components=[H2O, TDS]; phases=[Liq]; scope=[chiller, MD.cold_ch, hx.hot, separator_permeate, pump_permeate,
permeate]); seawater (components=[H2O, TDS]; phases=[Liq]; scope=[feed, pump_feed, mixer, hx.cold, pump_brine, heater, MD.hot_ch, separa-
tor_concentrate, reject]); water_vapor (components=[H2O]; phases=[Vap]; scope=[]). Emit all 15 exact stream endpoints: feed_to_feed_pump: feed.
outlet→pump_feed.inlet ; feed_pump_to_mixer: pump_feed.outlet→mixer.feed ; mixer_to_heat_exchanger_cold_side: mixer.
outlet→hx.cold_inlet ; heat_exchanger_cold_out_to_brine_pump: hx.cold_outlet→pump_brine.inlet ; brine_pump_to_heater:
pump_brine.outlet→heater.inlet ; heater_to_md_hot_inlet: heater.outlet→MD.hot_ch_inlet ; md_hot_outlet_to_concentrate_
separator: MD.hot_ch_outlet→separator_concentrate.inlet ; concentrate_separator_to_reject: separator_concentrate.reject
→reject.inlet ; concentrate_separator_recycle_to_mixer: separator_concentrate.recycle→mixer.recycle ; chiller_to_md_
cold_inlet: chiller.outlet→MD.cold_ch_inlet ; md_cold_outlet_to_heat_exchanger_hot_side: MD.cold_ch_outlet→hx.hot_
inlet; heat_exchanger_hot_out_to_permeate_separator: hx.hot_outlet→separator_permeate.inlet ; permeate_separator_to_
product: separator_permeate.permeate→permeate.inlet ; permeate_separator_cold_loop_to_pump: separator_permeate.cold_
loop_stream→pump_permeate.inlet ; permeate_pump_to_chiller: pump_permeate.outlet→chiller.inlet . Terminal feeds: none; termi-
nal products: none.
Stage 5: Specification: close operating choices and degrees of freedom
Topology Validator / Prebuilder(to Specification Agent):
The typed unit, package, configuration, port, arc, terminal, and construction checks pass for the accepted TopologyIR; only the accepted topology advances.
Specification Agent(to DOF Checker):
Emit all 10 persisted SpecIR assignments one-to-one. The provenance markerChE-agent/DoF-validateddenotes a Specification Agent proposal accepted
by the deterministic DoF gate.Unit configuration (8): system.overall_recovery = 0.5 dimensionless (official default overall water recovery; ChE-
agent/DoF-validated); MD.permeability_coef = 1e-10 kg/m/s/Pa (official membrane permeability coefficient; ChE-agent/DoF-validated);MD.membrane_
24

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
thickness = 0.0001 m (official membrane thickness; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); MD.membrane_thermal_conductivity = 0.2 W/m/K (official
membrane thermal conductivity; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); hx.overall_heat_transfer_coefficient = 2000 W/m^2/K (official heat exchanger
coefficient; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); heater.max_outlet_temperature = 363.15 K (optimization upper bound from official case; ChE-agent/DoF-
validated); chiller.min_outlet_temperature = 283.15 K (optimization lower bound from official case; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); optimization.
objective = LCOW $/m^3 (final WaterTAP optimization objective; ChE-agent/DoF-validated).Stream configuration (2): feed.feed_flow_mass = 1
kg/s (official default total feed mass flow; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); feed.feed_mass_frac_TDS = 0.035 mass fraction (official default feed salinity;
ChE-agent/DoF-validated). No assignment is replaced by a count.
DOF Checker(to BuildPlan Compiler):
Validate target existence, compatibility, duplicate/conflicting fixes, terminal closure, and expected steady-state DoF. The promoted SpecIR and deterministic
DoF report pass before compilation.
Stage 6: Build and initialize the accepted white-box model
BuildPlan Compiler(to Initialization / Native Solver):
Compile the hermetic BuildPlan from the accepted TopologyIR and SpecIR. Initialization contract: solve order=[feed, MD, concentrate separator, feed
pump, mixer, heat exchanger, brine pump, heater, permeate separator, permeate pump, chiller, LCOW optimization]; strategy=WaterTAP MD build,
set_operating_conditions, initialize_system through hot and cold recycle loops, simulation solve, then optimize_set_up and LCOW solve. Recycle/tear
contract: []. Solve contract: native_solve_disabled=false; expected_dof=0 for simulation, 6 for optimization.
Stage 7: Solve, inspect diagnostics, repair, and optimize only when eligible
Native Solver(to Failure Router / Report):
Persist pass=True, termination optimal, final DoF 0, stage steady_state_simulation, and no terminal error. Representative same-run stream/product
quantities: heat_exchanger_hot_out_to_permeate_separator [mass_flow=8.04107; flow_kg_s=8.04107; temperature=298.03; pressure=374,271;
flow_mass_phase_comp: Liq/H2O=8.04107, Liq/TDS=4.47114e-17];permeate_separator_to_product[mass_flow=0.4825; flow_kg_s=0.4825; tem-
perature=298.03; pressure=374,271; flow_mass_phase_comp: Liq/H2O=0.4825, Liq/TDS=5.91586e-20]; permeate_separator_cold_loop_to_pump
[mass_flow=7.55857; flow_kg_s=7.55857; temperature=298.03; pressure=374,271; flow_mass_phase_comp: Liq/H2O=7.55857, Liq/TDS=4.47114e-
17]; permeate_pump_to_chiller [mass_flow=7.55857; flow_kg_s=7.55857; temperature=298.03; pressure=601,325; flow_mass_phase_comp:
Liq/H2O=7.55857, Liq/TDS=4.47114e-17]. Source evidence is reported as the accepted output of the native execution node.
Debug Supervisor audit (standby)(to Failure Router / Report):
No fault was routed to Debug; no diagnosis, repair artifact, or replay was generated. The supervisor remained armed from before Stage 1 through terminal
acceptance.
Failure Router(to Optimization Agent / Report):
Read the structured topology, specification, DoF, and accepted execution reports. Close the bounded repair branch, then pass the accepted simulator state to
Optimization only when the request makes that role eligible.
Optimization Agent(to Deterministic runner / Report):
Optimization was invoked through the collaborating agent plan and deterministic runner. Objective: minimize levelized cost of water. Validated variables:
fs.MD.area; fs.MD.length; fs.hx.area; fs.heater.control_volume.properties_out[0].temperature; fs.chiller.control_volume.
properties_out[0].temperature; fs.pump_brine.control_volume.properties_out[0].pressure; target DoF 6; plan constraints: MD
hot-channel inlet pressure <= 1e6 Pa. Native same-run outcome: pass=true; stage=design_optimization_solver; case_family=watertap_membrane_distillation;
official_reference_url=https://watertap.readthedocs.io/en/stable/technical_reference/flowsheets/membrane_distillation.html; simula-
tion_termination_condition=optimal; termination_condition=optimal; final_dof=6; water_recovery=0.5; recycle_ratio=6.1696; lev-
elized_cost_of_water=15.4446; specific_energy_consumption=182.872; thermal_efficiency=0.678341; effectiveness=0.858913;
permeate_tds_mass_fraction=-4.0516e-38; md_area_m2=103.182; heat_exchanger_area_m2=291.078; heater_outlet_temperature_k=363.15;
chiller_outlet_temperature_k=291.629; brine_pump_outlet_pressure_pa=1e+06. Decision-variable values: . Constraint values: . Product/design values: .
IDAES FV exporter(to Web / manuscript report):
After solve and any eligible optimization, export the same-run flowsheet visualization with 28 FV cells. Retain the ChE process evidence, accepted topology,
FV graph, and terminal numerical evidence as one LangGraph trajectory.
25

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
Figure 8: WaterTAP membrane-distillation recirculation collaboration audit bundle. Panels show (A) process evidence,
(B) accepted TopologyIR, (C) the IDAES flowsheet view, and (D) terminal numerical evidence from the same trajectory.
26

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
Autothermal Reformer
Autothermal reformer—complete interaction trace
ChE-knowledge-informed LangGraph trajectory
LangGraph collaboration profile(to Case report):
Input Understanding, Intent, Visual, Topology, Specification, deterministic validation, execution, and conditional Debug/Optimization roles form one
artifact-consistent trajectory. Role reasoning is bounded by medium. The visibility gateway records 6 scoped model-agent calls and 18 visibility-audit events
with zero boundary errors. Structured-output repairs=0; Debug replays=0. The Debug supervisor is armed before Stage 1. The deterministic execution returns
optimizedwith final acceptance at the report boundary.
Stage 1: Input Understanding: preserve requirements, relations, and negations
Root User(to Input Understanding): Build the NGFC autothermal-reformer subsystem with staged air compression and intercooling, natural-gas expansion,
recuperative heating, feed and bypass mixing, autothermal reforming, and the downstream bypass rejoin. Include the steady-state design optimization.
Input Understanding(to Intent Router):
Normalize the request as optimize in Natural Gas Fuel Cell (NGFC) preprocessing. Required features: staged_air_compression; intercooling
; natural_gas_expansion; recuperative_heater; feed_bypass_mixer; autothermal_reformer; bypass_rejoin_mixer. Negated features:
none. Directed relations: air_compressor_stage_1 feeds intercooler; intercooler feeds air_compressor_stage_2; natural_gas_inlet feeds expansion_valve; expan-
sion_valve feeds recuperative_heater_cold_side; recuperative_heater_hot_side feeds autothermal_reformer; feed_bypass_mixer feeds autothermal_reformer;
autothermal_reformer feeds bypass_rejoin_mixer. Assumptions: Assume standard NGFC preprocessing topology where air and fuel streams are prepared
separately before mixing or reacting.; ambiguities: none; clarification required=False; confidence 0.95.
Stage 2: Intent: recover the ChE process boundary and downstream obligations
Intent Router(to ChE evidence coordinator / Visual Descriptor):
Interpret the request as NGFC ATR in the process_system domain. Route the required equipment and process features— staged_air_compression;
intercooling; natural_gas_expansion; recuperative_heater; feed_bypass_mixer; autothermal_reformer; bypass_rejoin_mixer—
and directed ChE relations—air_compressor_stage_1 feeds intercooler; intercooler feeds air_compressor_stage_2; natural_gas_inlet feeds expansion_valve;
expansion_valve feeds recuperative_heater_cold_side; recuperative_heater_hot_side feeds autothermal_reformer; feed_bypass_mixer feeds autother-
mal_reformer; autothermal_reformer feeds bypass_rejoin_mixer—to the downstream roles. Preserve explicit negations and bounded assumptions; confidence
1.
Stage 3: Visual evidence: translate the PFD into an inspectable observation
ChE evidence coordinator(to Visual Descriptor):
Provide a role-scoped engineering evidence packet from the process request and authoritative process documentation. It contains equipment functions, visible
labels, material/energy-flow direction, recycle or branch cues, operating semantics, and an explicit uncertainty boundary. LangGraph exposes this ChE
evidence to the perception role without adding executable implementation details.
Visual Descriptor(to VisualGraphIR Validator / Topology Agent):
Act as the modeling-assistance perception adapter. The persisted VisualGraphIR contains 38 nodes and 14 edges. Its actual observation excerpt is retained
below:
{
"schema_version": "visual_graph_ir/2",
"nodes": [
{
"visual_id": "Fs_air_compressor_s1_inlet",
"label_text": "Fs.air_compressor_s1.inlet",
"equipment_class_guess": "PressureChanger",
"bbox": [
0.18,
0.27,
0.32,
0.35
],
"confidence_0_1": 0.95,
"evidence_ref": "Top-left labeled inlet arrow for air compressor stage 1"
}
],
"edges": [
{
"visual_edge_id": "TO_NG_EXP",
"source_visual_id": "recuperator_shell_outlet",
"destination_visual_id": "natural_gas_expander_inlet",
"label_text": "Preheated Natural Gas",
"direction_confidence_0_1": 0.95,
"is_recycle_guess": false,
"evidence_ref": "Dashed purple arrow from recuperator to expander"
}
]
}
A one-to-one audit against the same run’s source flowchart found a bounded visible-graph correction: Collapse endpoint-only port placeholders back onto the
visible equipment to restore a connected equipment graph; Retain the air-compression train, steam and natural-gas feeds, reformer bypass, recuperator, and
final syngas/bypass rejoin shown in the source. This is an explicit source-verification supplement and is not reattributed to the original Visual Descriptor
response:
27

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
{
"audit_status": "same-source publication correction",
"mode": "replace",
"verified_node_count": 14,
"verified_edge_count": 15,
"correction_summary": [
"Collapse endpoint-only port placeholders back onto the visible equipment to restore a connected equipment graph.",
"Retain the air-compression train, steam and natural-gas feeds, reformer bypass, recuperator, and final syngas/bypass rejoin
shown in the source."
]
}
The source-verified publication layer contains 14 nodes and 15 edges. Complete node inventory: AirFeed=Feed; air_compressor_s1=PressureChanger;
intercooler_s1=Heater; air_compressor_s2=PressureChanger; intercooler_s2=Heater; SteamFeed=Feed; NaturalGasFeed=Feed;
reformer_recuperator=HeatExchanger; natural_gas_expander=PressureChanger; reformer_bypass=Separator; reformer_mix=Mixer;
reformer=GibbsReactor; bypass_rejoin=Mixer; ToPowerIsland=Product. Complete directed-edge inventory: air_feed_to_c1: AirFeed→air_
compressor_s1; c1_to_ic1: air_compressor_s1→intercooler_s1; ic1_to_c2: intercooler_s1→air_compressor_s2; c2_to_ic2:
air_compressor_s2→intercooler_s2; ic2_to_mix: intercooler_s2→reformer_mix; steam_to_mix: SteamFeed→reformer_mix;
ng_to_recuperator: NaturalGasFeed→reformer_recuperator; recuperator_to_expander: reformer_recuperator→natural_gas_
expander; expander_to_bypass: natural_gas_expander→reformer_bypass; bypass_to_mix: reformer_bypass→reformer_mix; mix_
to_reformer: reformer_mix→reformer; reformer_to_recuperator: reformer→reformer_recuperator; recuperator_to_rejoin:
reformer_recuperator→bypass_rejoin; bypass_to_rejoin: reformer_bypass→bypass_rejoin; rejoin_to_product: bypass_
rejoin→ToPowerIsland. Visible text labels: none. Uncertainty boundary: The validator represented 23 one-sided visual edge endpoints as endpoint-only
boundary nodes (11 feed-side and 12 product-side). This representation-only closure added no edge or internal equipment. The Topology Agent consumes the
persisted promoted artifact together with routed ChE constraints and simulator capabilities; the audit layer documents the flowchart-to-VisualIR correction
transparently rather than altering the selected run.
VisualGraphIR Validator(to Topology Agent):
Validate the visual schema, unique node/edge identifiers, normalized geometry, endpoint closure, evidence references, and uncertainty boundary before
topology synthesis.
Stage 4: Topology: combine observations with ChE and simulator constraints
Topology Agent(to Topology Validator / Prebuilder):
Combine the typed visual record with routed ChE constraints and simulator capabilities. Emit all 10 typed units: reformer_recuperator HeatExchanger
(ChE role preheat natural gas using hot reformer outlet, package NG_props, stage atr_reformer); NG_expander PressureChanger (ChE role expand
preheated natural gas before bypass split, package NG_props, stage atr_reformer); reformer_bypass Separator (ChE role split natural gas between
reformer and bypass, package NG_props, stage atr_reformer); air_compressor_s1 PressureChanger (ChE role first-stage air compressor, package
NG_props, stage atr_reformer); intercooler_s1 Heater (ChE role first intercooler, package NG_props, stage atr_reformer); air_compressor_
s2 PressureChanger (ChE role second-stage air compressor, package NG_props, stage atr_reformer); intercooler_s2 Heater (ChE role second inter-
cooler, package NG_props, stage atr_reformer); reformer_mix Mixer (ChE role mix natural gas, compressed air, and steam, package NG_props, stage
atr_reformer); reformer GibbsReactor (ChE role autothermal reforming Gibbs reactor, package NG_props, stage atr_reformer); bypass_rejoin
Mixer (ChE role mix reformer syngas with natural-gas bypass, package NG_props, stage atr_reformer). Property/reaction package surface: NG_props
(components=[H2, CO, H2O, CO2, CH4, C2H6, C3H8, C4H10, N2, O2, Ar]; phases=[Vap]; scope=[reformer_recuperator, NG_expander, reformer_bypass,
air_compressor_s1, intercooler_s1, air_compressor_s2, intercooler_s2, reformer_mix, reformer, bypass_rejoin]). Emit all 11 exact stream endpoints:
TO_NG_EXP: reformer_recuperator.tube_outlet→NG_expander.inlet ; NG_EXP_OUT: NG_expander.outlet→reformer_bypass.inlet ;
TO_REF: reformer_bypass.reformer_outlet→reformer_mix.gas_inlet ; STAGE_1_OUT: air_compressor_s1.outlet→intercooler_s1.
inlet; IC_1_OUT: intercooler_s1.outlet→air_compressor_s2.inlet ; STAGE_2_OUT: air_compressor_s2.outlet→intercooler_s2.
inlet; IC_2_OUT: intercooler_s2.outlet→reformer_mix.oxygen_inlet ; REF_IN: reformer_mix.outlet→reformer.inlet ; REF_OUT:
reformer.outlet→reformer_recuperator.shell_inlet ; REF_RECUP_OUT: reformer_recuperator.shell_outlet→bypass_rejoin.
syngas_inlet; REF_BYPASS: reformer_bypass.bypass_outlet→bypass_rejoin.bypass_inlet . Terminal feeds: reformer_recuperator.
tube_inlet;air_compressor_s1.inlet;reformer_mix.steam_inlet; terminal products:bypass_rejoin.outlet.
Stage 5: Specification: close operating choices and degrees of freedom
Topology Validator / Prebuilder(to Specification Agent):
The typed unit, package, configuration, port, arc, terminal, and construction checks pass for the accepted TopologyIR; only the accepted topology advances.
Specification Agent(to DOF Checker):
Emit all 7 persisted SpecIR assignments one-to-one. The provenance markerChE-agent/DoF-validateddenotes a Specification Agent proposal accepted by the
deterministic DoF gate.Unit configuration (2): reformer_bypass.split_fraction[0, ’bypass_outlet’] = 0.6 dimensionless (internal reformation
bypass fraction; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); reformer_mix.steam_to_ng_ratio = 1 dimensionless (official steam flow constraint uses steam = (1 -
IR) * NG flow; ChE-agent/DoF-validated).Stream configuration (5): reformer_recuperator.tube_inlet.flow_mol[0] = 1161.9 mol/s (natural
gas feed flow; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); air_compressor_s1.inlet.flow_mol[0] = 1332.9 mol/s (air feed initial flow; ChE-agent/DoF-validated);
reformer_mix.steam_inlet.flow_mol[0] = 464.77 mol/s (steam feed initial flow; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); reformer.outlet.temperature[
0] = 1060.93 K (reformer outlet temperature; ChE-agent/DoF-validated); reformer.outlet.pressure[0] = 137895 Pa (reformer outlet pressure;
ChE-agent/DoF-validated). No assignment is replaced by a count.
DOF Checker(to BuildPlan Compiler):
Validate target existence, compatibility, duplicate/conflicting fixes, terminal closure, and expected steady-state DoF. The promoted SpecIR and deterministic
DoF report pass before compilation.
Stage 6: Build and initialize the accepted white-box model
BuildPlan Compiler(to Initialization / Native Solver):
28

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
Compile the hermetic BuildPlan from the accepted TopologyIR and SpecIR. Initialization contract: solve order=[reformer, reformer_recuperator, NG_expander,
reformer_bypass, air_compressor_s1, intercooler_s1, air_compressor_s2, intercooler_s2, reformer_mix, bypass_rejoin]; strategy=simulator-native NGFC
initialize_reformer(). Recycle/tear contract: []. Solve contract: native_solve_disabled=false; expected_dof=0.
Stage 7: Solve, inspect diagnostics, repair, and optimize only when eligible
Native Solver(to Failure Router / Report):
Persist pass=True, termination optimal, final DoF 0, stage steady_state_solver, and no terminal error. Representative same-run stream/product
quantities: steam_feed [flow_mol=464.76; temperature=422; pressure=206,843; mole_frac_comp: H2=1e-11, CO=1e-11, H2O=1, CO2=1e-11];
reformer_inlet [flow_mol=2262.45; temperature=469.838; pressure=203,396; mole_frac_comp: H2=2.59655e-11, CO=2.59655e-11, H2O=0.21155,
CO2=0.00223098]; reformer_outlet [flow_mol=2942.07; temperature=1060.93; pressure=137,895; mole_frac_comp: H2=0.34036, CO=0.112478,
H2O=0.13826, CO2=0.0517876]; atr_syngas_product [flow_mol=3639.21; temperature=621.322; pressure=137,895; mole_frac_comp: H2=0.27516,
CO=0.0909317, H2O=0.111775, CO2=0.0437826]. Source evidence is reported as the accepted output of the native execution node.
Debug Supervisor audit (standby)(to Failure Router / Report):
No fault was routed to Debug; no diagnosis, repair artifact, or replay was generated. The supervisor remained armed from before Stage 1 through terminal
acceptance.
Failure Router(to Optimization Agent / Report):
Read the structured topology, specification, DoF, and accepted execution reports. Close the bounded repair branch, then pass the accepted simulator state to
Optimization only when the request makes that role eligible.
Optimization Agent(to Deterministic runner / Report):
Optimization was invoked through the collaborating agent plan and deterministic runner. Objective: maximize syngas H2 mole fraction. Validated
variables: fs.reformer_bypass.split_fraction[0, ’bypass_outlet’] ; target DoF 1; plan constraints: syngas N2 mole fraction <= 0.34.
Native same-run outcome: pass=true; stage=steady_state_optimization; case_family=ngfc_atr; official_reference_url=https://idaes.github.io/examples-
pse/latest/Examples/Flowsheets/power_generation/ngfc/NGFC_flowsheet_doc.html; optimization_form=rigorous_ngfc_reformer_subsystem_ipopt;
termination_condition=optimal; steady_state_dof_before_optimization=0; optimization_degrees_of_freedom=1; final_dof=1; objec-
tive_max_h2_mole_fraction=0.327834. Decision-variable values: bypass_frac=0.194765; steam_to_ng_ratio_effective=1. Constraint val-
ues: bypass_frac_bounds=[0.1, 0.8]; max_product_n2_mole_fraction=0.34; product_n2_mole_fraction=0.34. Product/design values:
atr_syngas_h2_mole_fraction=0.327834; atr_syngas_n2_mole_fraction=0.34; atr_syngas_flow_mol=6148.94; atr_syngas_temperature=815.911;
atr_syngas_pressure=137,895.
IDAES FV exporter(to Web / manuscript report):
After solve and any eligible optimization, export the same-run flowsheet visualization with 29 FV cells. Retain the ChE process evidence, accepted topology,
FV graph, and terminal numerical evidence as one LangGraph trajectory.
29

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
Figure 9: Autothermal reformer collaboration audit bundle. Panels show (A) process evidence, (B) accepted TopologyIR,
(C) the IDAES flowsheet view, and (D) terminal numerical evidence from the same trajectory.
30

CRAFTS: Collaborative Role-Adaptive Fine-Tuning of LLM Agents for Chemical Process Simulation
