record_id: arxiv:2410.21286
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2410.21286
fetched_title: OPEN CITY: A S CALABLE PLATFORM TO SIMULATE URBAN ACTIVITIES WITH MASSIVE LLM A GENTS
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:01:00Z

OPEN CITY: A S CALABLE PLATFORM TO SIMULATE URBAN
ACTIVITIES WITH MASSIVE LLM A GENTS
Yuwei Yan∗ 1, Qingbin Zeng∗ 2, Zhiheng Zheng3, Jingzhe Yuan2, Jie Feng2, Jun Zhang2, Fengli Xu† 2, and Yong Li† 2
1Information Hub, The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (GuangZhou)
2Department of Electronic Engineering, Tsinghua University
3Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University
October 30, 2024
ABSTRACT
Agent-based models (ABMs) have long been employed to explore how individual behaviors aggregate
into complex societal phenomena in urban space. Unlike black-box predictive models, ABMs excel
at explaining the micro-macro linkages that drive such emergent behaviors. The recent rise of Large
Language Models (LLMs) has led to the development of LLM agents capable of simulating urban ac-
tivities with unprecedented realism. However, the extreme high computational cost of LLMs presents
significant challenges for scaling up the simulations of LLM agents. To address this problem, we
propose OpenCity, a scalable simulation platform optimized for both system and prompt efficiencies.
Specifically, we propose a LLM request scheduler to reduce communication overhead by parallelizing
requests through IO multiplexing. Besides, we deisgn a “group-and-distill” prompt optimization strat-
egy minimizes redundancy by clustering agents with similar static attributes. Through experiments
on six global cities, OpenCity achieves a 600-fold acceleration in simulation time per agent, a 70%
reduction in LLM requests, and a 50% reduction in token usage. These improvements enable the sim-
ulation of 10,000 agents’ daily activities in 1 hour on commodity hardware. Besides, the substantial
speedup of OpenCity allows us to establish a urban simulation benchmark for LLM agents for the first
time, comparing simulated urban activities with real-world data in 6 major cities around the globe. We
believe our OpenCity platform provides a critical infrastructure to harness the power of LLMs for in-
terdisciplinary studies in urban space, fostering the collective efforts of broader research communities.
Code repo is available at https://anonymous.4open.science/r/Anonymous-OpenCity-42BD.
1 Introduction
Agent-based models (ABMs) were first introduced to urban studies in the seminal work of Thomas Schelling about
50 years ago [1], which ingeniously explained how segregation can emerge as the aggregation of individual choices.
Compared to black-box predictive models, ABMs offer the unique advantage of explaining the underlying mechanisms
behind aggregated phenomena [2], i.e., revealing the connections between “micro-motives” and “macro-behaviours.”
As a result, ABMs play an important role in many research areas [3], including computational social sciences, urban
planning and public health. The recent advance of Large Language Models (LLMs) have driven the rise of LLM
agents [4, 5], which leverage LLM’s remarkable capabilities of commonsense reasoning and role-playing to simulate
human behaviours. Unlike previous rule-based agents, these emerging LLM agents generate far more realistic human
behaviours [4, 6], and can also explain their inner motives via prompting techniques like chain-of-thoughts [ 7].
Therefore, LLM agents hold great potential to harness the power of language models in transforming urban studies.
*Equal Contribution.
†Corresponding authors.
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2410.21286v1 [cs.MA] 11 Oct 2024

A PREPRINT - OCTOBER 30, 2024
Despite this promising outlook, LLM agents also face severe challenges of scaling up due to the high computation time.
In the pioneering work of Park et al. [4] only 15 LLM agents were employed to simulate a small village. One main
reason is the prohibitive simulation time, which can be broken down into two parts: on one hand, LLMs are inherently
slow due to their enormous model sizes; on the other hand, powerful commercial LLMs are only accessible via APIs,
which introduces significant time delay due to network transmission, further slowing down simulation. To make matters
worse, the prompt design of urban LLM agents often involve dynamic elements, such as the changing memories and
perceived environment [4, 8]. This important feature prevents the straightforward reuse of simulated behaviors from a
small sample of the population [9], as LLM agents need to maintain independent memories and experiences, which are
essential for simulating a vibrant and diverse urban population.
In this paper, we present OpenCity, a scalable platform that introduces both system-level and prompt-level optimizations
to enable efficient LLM agent simulation in urban environments. Specifically, we design an LLM request scheduler that
leverages the scalable I/O event notification mechanism in operating system (e.g., epoll in Linux [10]) to minimize
network transmission delay. This design is based on our key observation that sending LLM requests and receiving
generated output account for only a small portion of total communication time, while the rest are wasted on waiting
for LLM responses and the repeatedly establishing TCP connections [11]. To address this problem, the LLM request
scheduler uses the scalable I/O event notification mechanism to parallelize LLM requests by reusing the network
I/O portal and TCP connections while waiting for responses. Besides, LLM request scheduler also analyzes the
interdependencies of LLM requests and local computation tasks, e.g., updating agent’s memory and retrieving nearby
locations, ensuring local computation tasks are optimally distributed across multiple CPU cores. These system-level
optimizations enable large-scale LLM agent simulations to run on commodity hardware. As for the prompt-level
optimization, OpenCity introduces a novel “group-and-distill” prompt strategy to minimize the input token required by
LLMs. The key idea is to identify the clusters of LLM agents that share semantically similar static elements, e.g., age,
gender and income level, and use shared context in batch prompting [12] to reduce token redundancy. Specifically, our
“group-and-distill” strategy leverages the in-context learning capabilities of LLMs to implement a prototype learning
workflow that automatically discovers clusters of LLM agents with semantically similar static elements for simulation.
Agents within the same clusters are grouped into a batch prompt, and we design a “prompt distillation” to extract shared
prefix for grouped agents. Finally, OpenCity also features an easy-to-use web portal that facilitates code-less simulation
configuration and result visualization. This design minimizes the program requirement for running simulation with
LLM agents, ensuring our OpenCity platform can benefit researchers from all background.
We evaluate the efficiency and faithfulness of OpenCity in simulating the urban activities of 6 cities around the world
using the widely adopted Generative Agent workflow [ 4]. Our experiments show OpenCity achieves an average
635x acceleration in simulations with 10,000 LLM agents. Besides, the number of requests and consumed tokens are
reduced by 73.7% and 45.5%, respectively. OpenCity also shows strong scalability, with the simulation time per agent
reducing from 36.25 to 0.06 seconds as the simulation size increases from 1 to 10,000 agents, demonstrating that larger
simulations allow for more efficient LLM request scheduling and prompt distillation. More importantly, OpenCity also
maintains high faithfulness of the simulated behaviour. Specifically, the Jensen–Shannon divergence and top-1 hit rates
of our method are comparable to the standard prompting technique of batch prompting [12], and substantially surpass
straightforward reusing strategy [9]. Besides, the top-1 hit rate can reaches up to 96% when using powerful LLMs like
GPT-4o.
The substantial simulation acceleration allows us to benchmark LLM agents’ ability to replicate large-scale urban
activities for the first time. We use classic evaluation measures such as the radius of gyration [13], origin-destination
matrix [14], and segregation index [15] to assess LLM agents’ simulations. These are the most widely adopted metrics
that characterize urban residents’ activities at both individual and group levels, and across physical and social domains.
Our experiments show that LLM agents perform comparably to, or better than, traditional rule-based agents like
EPR [16]. Moreover, LLM agents enable counterfactual analyses, such as evaluating experienced segregation in cities
without residential segregation [17]. They also allow researchers to interrogate LLM agents’ motives behind their
behaviors, offering valuable insights for urban policy-making.
We believe our OpenCity platform can serve as a critical infrastructure to unleash the power of LLMs in the interdisci-
plinary studies in urban space. It not only provides high speedup that allows large simulation to run on commodity
hardware, but also offers a user-friendly web portal that allows researchers with minimum programming background to
access this technology. It will facilitate a broader research community and other stakeholders to use LLM agents to
evaluate, analyze and inform their projects.
2

A PREPRINT - OCTOBER 30, 2024
2 Related Works
2.1 LLM Agents
With the widespread use of large language models (LLMs) in various applications, the limitations of LLMs, e.g.,
unstable reasoning abilities, limited memory capacity, and lack of specialized expertise, have been exposed to the public.
As one of the potential solution, LLM agents are proposed to overcome these limitations and promote the practical
application of LLMs. AutoGPT [18] as one of the most popular LLM autonomous agent explore the potential of applying
LLM to enable the autonomous planning and task-solving. After that, LLM agents [ 19, 20] have made significant
progress in two directions: task-oriented agents and simulation agents. Following the first direction, researchers aim to
improve LLM agent’s ability to solve complex tasks. For example, lots of programming agents, such as ChatDev [21],
SWEAgent [22], and MetaGPT [23], are designed to solve the complex programming tasks. As for the second direction,
generative agents [4] have demonstrated the potential of large models in simulating human behavior, which has been
further validated in subsequent research. S3 [ 24] explores the potential of using LLM agents to simulate the social
network. CoPB [6] defines a agentic workflow to simulate the mobility behaviors. RecAgent [25] simulate the user
behavior in the recommendation system. While these works demonstrate the potential of LLM agents, the large scale
efficient simulation of generative agents becomes the critical bottleneck of further applications.
2.2 LLM Deployment Optimization
To support the efficient inference of LLMs and LLM agents, enormous works and systems [26] are designed to optimize
the inference efficiency of LLMs and further accelerate their practical applications. For example, Flash-attention [27] is
an IO-aware exact attention algorithm which uses tiling to reduce the number of memory reads/writes within GPU.
AWQ [28] is an activation-aware weight quantization to compress and accelerate the LLM inference. vLLM [ 29]
proposes pagedAttention mechanism to enable highly efficient KV cache scheduler during the inference and becomes
the most population open source LLM inference engine. SGLang [30] provides a flexible frontend language to enable
the efficient autonomous optimization of LLM inference. Synergy-of-thought [ 31] proposes to exploit the synergy
between larger and smaller language models for efficient reasoning. While these systems are designed to process the
general LLM inference, specific characteristics of generative agents especially urban generative agents are ignored
which can be employed to further accelerate the inference and simulation. In this paper, we explore the potential of this
direction and design the OpenCity platform.
3 Preliminaries
3.1 LLM Agents for Urban Activities
We focus on using LLM agents to reproduce urban dynamics characterized primarily by physical mobility. Consider
an urban environment E containingN LLM agents. The state of agent i at simulation time t, denoted as Si(t) =
{si,mi(t)}, consists of both static properties si and dynamic properties mi(t). Static properties, like the agent’s
demographics, remain constant throughout the simulation, while dynamic properties, such as memory and perceived
environment information, change frequently and are hard to predict. We can represent the state update of agenti using
a functionf:
mi(t + 1) =f(si,E,m i(t);Si(t + 1) ={si,mi(t + 1)} (1)
Here,mi(t + 1) is the updated memory of agent i at timet + 1, and the function f models how the agent updates
its state by perceiving the urban environmentE, reflecting on its memorymi(t), and interacting with the LLM. The
individual trajectory of agenti, denoted asTi, describes the trajectory of the agent over time in the urban environmentE.
If the location of agenti at timet is represented byLi(t), which depends on its stateSi(t), then the individual trace can
be expressed asTi ={Li(0),Li(1),Li(2),...,L i(ts)}, wherets is the the total simulation time. Along with individual
mobility, we also examine the aggregated mobility featuresA = Φ(P
iϕ(P
tSi(t))), such as Original-Destination
(OD) matrix and income segregation index, which reflects the urban dynamics involving states of all agents.
To simulate LLM agents in the urban space, we set the initial state for the agents and environment{Si(0)|i∈N} and
then apply the Equation 1 for each agent at every simulation step. When the number of agents increases, challenges
arise mainly because of the LLM request process. LLMs are inherently slow due to their parameter size, and when using
commercial LLMs accessed via APIs, response times can be further delayed, especially with poor network conditions.
Some have proposed reusing the LLM response for agents can improve the efficiency [9], but it requires that the agents
have the completely same state or have limit kinds of state that can be easily predicted. What’s more, simply reusing
the response would eliminate the independence of agents and reduce the faithfulness of the simulation results. Urban
3

A PREPRINT - OCTOBER 30, 2024
agenti has dynamic memorymi(t) that evolves during the simulation. This memorymi(t) depends not only on past
memorymi(th) but also on the current environment. Since decision-making and memory updates rely heavily on the
LLM, predicting an agent’s future state or finding an agent with an identical state to reuse an LLM response is difficult.
Therefore, to simulate the large-scale and reliable LLM agents for urban dynamics, a simple response reuse strategy is
insufficient.
3.2 Time Cost Analysis
In light of the prevailing dominance of remote LLM service invocations in the current operational landscape of LLM
agents simulation, a decomposition of the time required for a single LLM request can be undertaken, as illustrated
in Fig.1(b). The first phase is the initialization and reception time for the LLM request, the second is the TCP/IP
connection and destruction time between the simulation system and the LLM service provider, and the third is the data
transmission and waiting time. For a single LLM request, the overhead of the first and second phases is relatively low
in comparison to the third, and the core time consumption is derived from the data transmission and waiting.
The simulation of large-scale agents necessitates the issuance of a considerable number of LLM requests, which, given
the presence of waiting periods, impairs the overall efficiency of the simulator. Furthermore, the system resources
are not fully utilized. Consequently, the effective scheduling of LLM requests is essential for enhancing the overall
utilization of system resources, which in turn improves the overall efficiency of the simulation. Furthermore, as the time
required for LLM inference is directly proportional to the number of tokens contained in an LLM request, it is also
important to reduce the number of tokens consumed per agent while compressing the number of requests.
From this vantage point, the present work puts forth an efficacious LLM request scheduler and a prompt distillation
method, which can markedly enhance the efficiency of large-scale LLM agents simulation.
4 OpenCity Platform
We devise a scalable platform OpenCity to accelerate the simulation of urban LLM agents from both system- and
prompt-level. The OpenCity platform aims to substantially reduce the simulation time per LLM agent while maintaining
high simulation fidelity. Besides, OpenCity also provides a user-friendly web interface to facilitate the easy access of
researchers from diverse background. The key designs are introduced as follows.
4.1 LLM Request Scheduler
As shown in Fig.1(a), for a LLM agent, the dependency between its LLM requests—that is, the necessity for the next
LLM request to be initiated after the previous one is completed—results in a constant waiting time under the condition
of a fixed network environment and request content. In contrast, for a system comprising multiple agents, there is no
dependency between their LLM requests. In order to achieve asynchronous processing of multiple LLM requests, we
have implemented an IO multiplexing scheme (based on epoll in Linux) which eliminates waiting time in the simulation
system. This allows the operating system to manage IO waiting, thereby achieving the desired "zero-awareness" of
data transmission in the simulation system. Consequently, the average time for a LLM request is reduced to the time
required for the first and second phases (Time saving#1 in Fig.1(c)).
Furthermore, the considerable number of LLM calls necessitates the frequent establishment of connections with the
service provider, resulting in a considerable overhead in the establishment and destruction of each connection. However,
given that the content of LLM requests is inherently linked to the corresponding agent, it is possible to leverage the
same connection for multiple agents, thereby reducing the overall performance overhead. To address this issue, a pool
of reusable connections is maintained within the system. Upon initiation of an LLM request by an agent, the request
content is populated into an available connection, thus avoiding the establishment of a new connection. This approach
additionally reduces the mean time consumption of LLM requests (Time saving#2 in Fig.1(c)).
For those agents with CPU tasks during the computation process, it is important to note that the continued occupation of
CPU resources by the computation load will inevitably result in a delay in the sending of LLM requests from subsequent
agents. To mitigate the adverse effects of this issue on the system’s overall performance, we categorize the CPU task
as "local IO", offload it to available cores for computation through a multi-core parallel scheme, and then return the
result to the designated agent upon completion of the computation. This approach further ensures the stable operation
of asynchronous LLM requests (Time saving#3 in Fig.1(c)).
The proposed LLM request scheduler is designed to reduce the waiting time for a significant number of LLM requests
during the simulation runtime. Based on the supporting auxiliary scheme, it has the potential to significantly enhance
the efficiency of large-scale LLM agents.
4

A PREPRINT - OCTOBER 30, 2024
Figure 1: The functionality of the proposed LLM Request Scheduler.
4.2 Group-and-Distill Meta-Prompt Optimizer
A further crucial method for enhancing the efficiency of the simulation is to reduce the number of LLM requests issued
by agents and the quantity of tokens consumed by said agents. A conventional approach is to reuse the generated result
of a single LLM request across multiple agents. However, this approach presents two significant drawbacks: 1. In
fine-grained urban LLM agent simulations, each agent possesses its own dynamic properties. Consequently, the reuse
scheme compromises the independence of agents, which is antithetical to the objective of conducting urban simulations
through large-scale LLM agents. Furthermore, for agents with dynamic properties, it is inherently impossible to share
the result of a single LLM request, as shown in Fig.2(a).
To address this issue, we propose the Group-and-Distill Meta-Prompt Optimizer (depicted in Fig.2), which employs
group information in lieu of the static attributes of the agent. This approach aggregates requests from multiple agents
at runtime and realizes prompt by sharing group information and context information while preserving the agent’s
dynamic properties. The optimizer is comprised of two distinct components. In-context prototype learning (IPL) and
distill meta-prompt.
The inputs and outputs of IPL are defined as follow:
IPL ({si},M,T )→ G, D (2)
in which,{si} is the collection of agent’s static properties;M controls the number of agents in initial prototype learning;
T is the threshold for decision making; G is the collection of agent groups; D is the descriptions for each group of
agents.
Input the static properties of a set of agents, IPL first groups the first M agents, providing both group results and
the corresponding description information. Subsequently, IPL classifies the remaining agents by transmitting the
static properties of the agent to LLM, which analyzes the likelihood of the agent belonging to each group based
on the group description and provides the quantization result. By comparing the quantization result with T , when
the result is greater than T , IPL assigns the agent to the specified group. Otherwise, it constructs a new group and
describes the characteristics of the group. In comparison to conventional prototype learning methods that operate within
a fixed parameter space, IPL exhibits enhanced generalization capabilities and a particular aptitude for leveraging
semantic-level knowledge in the prototyping process. The prototype information obtained by IPL is employed to
efficiently summarize the static attribute characteristics of the set of agents within the specified group.
The distill meta-prompts obtained through a systematic examination of the original prompts and the CoT approach is
employed to generate the prompts (details can be found in Fig.A1). To facilitate the generation procedure, we have
proposed a raw prompt design diagram, which divides the prompt into three sections: the function section, the variable
section, and the input section. The generation process, which is initiated with a given raw prompt, comprises four steps:
summarization, context extraction, information sharing, and rewriting of the raw prompt into the distill meta-prompt. In
5

A PREPRINT - OCTOBER 30, 2024
Figure 2: Overview of Group-and-Distill Meta-Prompt Optimizer.
the operational phase, the requests from the agents in a group are aggregated into a single Distill request, which has the
effect of reducing the number of LLM requests and the consumption of tokens.
The proposed prompt optimizer enables further enhancement of simulation efficiency and reduction of simulation cost
while maintaining agent dynamic properties.
4.3 Web Portal
A web portal has been designed for the utilisation of OpenCity, encompassing the frontend, backend, and simulation
system. This enables users to rapidly configure simulation conditions and visualise simulation results, as well as
facilitating the storage of simulation data and urban infrastructure information within a database. The fundamental
concept underlying the design of this portal is user-friendliness, particularly given the inherently interdisciplinary nature
of urban research. We have developed a rapid, code-free configuration approach tailored to the needs of researchers,
thereby facilitating the seamless engagement of experts from diverse fields with our simulation platform.
User-friendliness: In order to enhance the usability of the OpenCity platform, the Web Portal has been augmented
with the incorporation of the LLM agent blueprint construction function. Users are able to drag and drop each basic
function module in order to construct complex logic for LLM agents. In order to meet a variety of needs, the blueprint
function is based on the established LLM agent development frameworks, such as Langchain [32] and AutoGPT [33],
and incorporates several fundamental modules oriented towards urban simulation, including environmental and traffic
sensing. The blueprint offers an efficient and agile development solution for interdisciplinary researchers, facilitating
the rapid iteration of simulation methods and theories.
Basic workflow: The primary process of urban LLM agent simulation on this web portal is comprised of three distinct
phases: citizen profile configuration, deployment and simulation, and results presentation. The configuration of the
citizen profile is facilitated by the provision of a console hub, which enables users to efficiently and transparently
administer the simulation tasks they have created on the platform, along with the agents within those simulations. The
user is able to bind the execution logic designed in the blueprint to different agents and to configure their profiles with
6

A PREPRINT - OCTOBER 30, 2024
great rapidity via the web interface. This may entail selecting a city, selecting an existing profile, or filling out a profile
manually. Once the configuration process is complete, users can deploy and initiate simulations on the platform with a
single click, leveraging the backend system and simulation system. The web portal also offers a monitor page, which
enables users to observe the real-time outcomes of ongoing simulations and assess the performance of their agents.
Finally, after the simulation has concluded, users can access the portal to view macroscopic statistical results in a visual
format, such as Origin-Destination (OD) maps. An exemplar of the proposed web portal in operation can be found in
Figure A2.
5 Benchmark
5.1 Dataset and Setup
Dataset We collect urban mobility data in 6 major cities around world: Beijing, New York, San Francisco, London,
Paris, and Sydney. The data sources vary. Beijing’s data comes from a related work [6], which collected from social
network platform. New York and San Francisco source from Safegraph for aggregated population flow data. And the
other three cities are from Foursquare which consist of thousands of check-ins data. To make better use of these data,
we have done some preprocess method, such as trajectory filter, home extraction and profile sampling. More details can
be seen in Appendix A.
Architecture of LLM Agent The main agent used in OpenCity platform to simulate the urban dynamic is the generative
agent [4]. Generative agents use a framework that involves perception, planning, and reflection. A generative agent first
creates a daily plan to ensure the trajectory is reasonable. When the agent arrives at a POI, it makes decisions based on
current perceptions and memory. After taking action, the agent records the action and the POI into its memory stream.
Once the memory stream reaches a threshold, the agent reflects. The results show that the generative agent to function
well in the OpenCity platform.
We also have rule-based agent for comparison, such as the famous Explore and Preferential-Return (EPR) model [16].
This work make agent choose to explore a new location or return to the visited location. Decisions are related to
some parameters to compute the probability. In this paper, we set the parameters as follows: exploration rateρ = 0.6,
exploration-return trade-off parameterγ = 0.21, waiting time distribution parametersτ = 17,β = 0.8.
5.2 Acceleration Performance
This section presents an evaluation of the performance of the OpenCity platform in conjunction with the Generative
Agent (Tested on Huawei ECS Cloud Server - Intel(R) Xeon(R) Platinum 8378C CPU @ 2.80GHz with 64 cores and
256 GB RAM). The performance of the platform was evaluated in six major cities with 10,000 agents. The results are
presented in Table.1, where the following variables are defined:Speedup denotes the improvements in simulation time,
Rr denotes the LLM request number reduction rate, andTr denotes the token number reduction rate.
The results demonstrate that OpenCity exhibits substantial acceleration in all test cities, with an average runtime of
0.058s per LLM agent and an average speedup of 635.3x in simulation time. Furthermore, the proposed acceleration
scheme is capable of markedly reducing the number of LLM requests and token consumption, with an average reduction
of 73.7% and 45.5%, respectively.
To assess the scalability of OpenCity, we conducted a series of simulations to evaluate its acceleration performance
under varying orders of magnitude of agents. The results of this analysis are presented in Fig.3, in which the baseline
represents the simulation time without optimization. The results demonstrate that OpenCity’s acceleration capability is
scalable, with a notable enhancement in acceleration effect when the number of agents is increased from 10 to 10,000.
This is due to the fact that as the number of agents increases, the number of groups obtained based on IPL also gradually
increases. This, in turn, allows the advantages of the LLM request scheduler to be fully realised, thereby ensuring a
better utilisation of system resources.
Furthermore, faithfulness experiments are conducted to demonstrate that the Group-and-Distill optimizer can effectively
preserve the distinctive personality traits of the agents. The testbed for this evaluation is location choice generation,
which requires the combination of agent properties to select the next location to visit. A comparison was conducted
between the performance of four distinct methods, including raw prompting (without any modification), batch prompt-
ing [12], archetype prompting [9], and the proposed method. One hundred agents were randomly selected and location
selection was performed 100 times for each agent with the same context. The effectiveness of the method was evaluated
by counting the distribution of selections (JSD ) as well as the top-1 hit rate (T 1). The results are shown in Table.2,
where Inherent denotes the bias present in LLM itself (raw prompt method).
7

A PREPRINT - OCTOBER 30, 2024
Cities Time Speedup Rr Tr
Beijing 0.07s 521.7 73.2% 38.7%
New York 0.06s 624.7 67.3% 37.6%
San Francisco 0.07s 588.6 80.3% 51.3%
London 0.04s 792.5 74.6% 49.9%
Paris 0.06s 640.0 76.3% 48.6%
Sydney 0.05s 644.0 70.7% 46.6%
Average 0.058s 635.3 73.7% 45.5%
Table 1: Acceleration experiment results
Figure 3: Scalability experiments
Model and Cities Inherent Batch prompting Archetype prompting Ours
J SD T 1 J SD T 1 J SD T 1 J SD T 1
4o-mini
BJ 0.04 ± 0.02 90% 0.11 ± 0.05 76% 0.89 ± 0.04 8% 0.13 ± 0.02 74%
NY 0.02 ± 0.01 92% 0.07 ± 0.03 81% 0.84 ± 0.11 13% 0.06 ± 0.04 86%
SF 0.03 ± 0.02 88% 0.09 ± 0.04 77% 0.91 ± 0.03 11% 0.10 ± 0.03 85%
Lo 0.06 ± 0.04 89% 0.12 ± 0.07 79% 0.86 ± 0.06 9% 0.12 ± 0.04 78%
Pa 0.05 ± 0.02 86% 0.17 ± 0.11 69% 0.94 ± 0.03 4% 0.14 ± 0.04 71%
Sy 0.04 ± 0.03 85% 0.08 ± 0.03 75% 0.88 ± 0.05 5% 0.07 ± 0.04 75%
GPT-4o NY 0.003 ± 0.002 98% 0.012 ± 0.007 94% 0.89 ± 0.09 10% 0.009 ± 0.004 97%
Pa 0.004 ± 0.002 99% 0.021 ± 0.009 93% 0.91 ± 0.04 7% 0.010 ± 0.006 96%
Table 2: Faithfulness experiment results
As evidenced by the results, our method demonstrates the capacity to maintain a comparable level of consistency
to that observed in the batch prompting method, while exhibiting a reduction in volatility and token consumption.
However, the archetype prompting method performs poorly in this evaluation, which further demonstrates the inability
of the reuse-based method to accommodate the dynamic properties of agents. Furthermore, given the considerable
discrepancies observed in the raw prompting method when evaluated using the GPT-4o-mini model, an additional
assessment was conducted on two cities, New York and Paris, utilising the GPT-4o model. The findings indicate that our
method is capable of approximating the execution of the raw prompting method to a significant degree. Additionally, the
results indicate that there are notable discrepancies between different models in terms of environmental comprehension
and the capacity to process lengthy textual content. The consistency of LLM outcomes merits further examination.
In general, OpenCity is capable of markedly enhancing the efficiency of large-scale urban LLM agent simulations while
concurrently preserving the distinctive characteristics of the agents themselves. This enables the cost of simulating
populations exceeding 10,000 to be maintained at the hourly level.
5.3 Reproducing Urban Dynamics
The significant increase in simulation efficiency enables us to benchmark LLM agent’s ability to reproduce large-scale
urban dynamics for the first time. We use comprehensive metrics in three-levels to evaluate the simulation performance,
from individual- to group level, and also from physical domain to social domain. At the individual level, we calculate
the radius of gyration [13] for each user. At the group level, we use the original-destination matrix [ 14]. As for the
social domain, we focus on the income segregation index [15]. To evaluation the simulation performance, we compute
the MSE for these three metrics, which are denoted asRMSE ,ODMSE andSMSE . More details can be referred to
Appendix B.
In this section, we analyze the performance of the Generative Agent and EPR Agent in reproducing urban dynamics.
We test both agents in 6 major cities using 1,000 agents. The results are shown in Table 3. The results indicate that both
the Generative Agent and EPR Agent successfully reproduce urban dynamics with low MSE values. Additionally, the
LLM Agent performs as well as or better than the classical rule-based EPR Agent, highlighting the advantage of LLM’s
semantic understanding ability in urban simulations.
8

A PREPRINT - OCTOBER 30, 2024
Cities GenerativeAgent EPR
RMSE ODMSE SMSE RMSE ODMSE SMSE
Beijing 19.5 3.88e-4 0.0312 29.8 4.26e-4 0.0630
New York - 5.95e-4 0.3521 - 3.70e-4 0.2319
San Francisco - 23.6e-4 0.1535 - 14.0e-4 0.0352
Paris 2.48 7.58e-4 0.1255 4.04 6.25e-4 0.1240
London 6.24 5.22e-4 0.1258 25.7 7.41e-4 0.1501
Sydney 15.1 4.71e-4 0.1118 54.2 7.63e-4 0.1265
Table 3: Urban dynamics reproduction results
6 Case Study: Experienced Urban Segregation
With the ability to simulate large-scale urban LLM agents, we can conduct counterfactual experiments to explore
outcomes under different policies and design optimal strategies for the future. Conventional rule-based models do
not support this capability, as they are designed to simulate real-world scenarios. Experienced urban segregation is a
widely discussed issue with significant impacts on social dynamics and the economy. It arises from both demographic
differences in residential neighborhoods and the mobility patterns of urban residents [15].
This section provides a case study: a counterfactual simulation is conducted in New York and San Francisco, to observe
how the simulation results change in different configurations, and try to summarize the results with the LLM agents
themselves.
Specifically, we construct the counterfactual scenario by evenly distributing LLM agents with different income levels
across the city, that means we almost eliminate the residential segregation. The results of the income segregation
statistics with CBGs as the statistical granularity are shown in Fig.4, where ‘Original’ samples the segregation results
from the real census data, and ‘Even’ is the result after uniform distribution of agents with different incomes.
Figure 4: The distribution of income segregation index for counterfactual experiment.
From the results, it can be seen that the segregation of the two cities changed significantly after the different income
groups were evenly distributed in the cities. In New York City, the mean segregation index decreases from 0.845 to
0.172, and in San Francisco, the mean segregation index decreases from 0.665 to 0.232. As a result, we believe that
differences between regions are the main cause of segregation as opposed to segregation by choice of action. To extend,
we can know that with policies that promote more even income distribution among neighborhoods, urban segregation
and social inequality can be improved.
Furthermore, we use natural language to communicate with those involved agents to gain deeper insights about urban
segregation. One detailed case is shown in Fig.5. When we ask an agent about its daily journey, it can accurately
provide the time and locations it visited. This is because the agent caches runtime information and uses the LLM’s
ability to understand semantic details. When asked about the people it met, the agent lists everyone it encountered
at different locations and provides their information. This is due to vectorized storage of the agent’s simulation
results and the LLM’s ability to retrieve that information. Collecting and observing fine-grained statistical information
through conversations with agents and even through LLM improves both the interpretability of the simulation and our
understanding of the simulation goals.
9

A PREPRINT - OCTOBER 30, 2024
Figure 5: A detail case of interpreting simulation results through communication.
7 Conclusion
In this work, we introduced OpenCity, a scalable platform designed to address the computational and communication
challenges inherent to the deployment of large-scale LLM-based urban agents in city simulations. By incorporating an
LLM request scheduler and a novel "group-and-distill" prompt optimization strategy, we achieved a notable 600-fold
increase in the efficiency of agent simulations, with a substantial reduction in both LLM requests and token usage.
The OpenCity platform was evaluated through experiments conducted on six global cities. The results demonstrated
the platform’s capability to simulate the daily activities of 10,000 agents at an hourly level, while also establishing a
benchmark for generative agent performance in urban contexts. The platform’s ability to compare simulated behaviors
with real-world data highlights its potential for real-world urban-scale applications, offering a robust tool for urban
planners and researchers to explore and understand complex societal phenomena.
10

A PREPRINT - OCTOBER 30, 2024
