record_id: arxiv:2508.08761
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2508.08761
fetched_title: DevNous: An LLM-Based Multi-Agent System for Grounding IT Project Management in Unstructured Conversation
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:49Z

DevNous: An LLM-Based Multi-Agent System for Grounding IT Project
Management in Unstructured Conversation
Preprint
Stavros Doropoulos ID 1∗
, Stavros Vologiannidis ID 1, and Ioannis Magnisalis ID 2
1Department of Computer, Informatics and Telecommunications Engineering, International Hellenic University, 62124 Serres,
Greece; sdoropoulos@ihu.edu.gr; svol@ihu.gr
2DG Informatics, European Commission, Brussels, Belgium; i.magnisalis@ihu.edu.gr
Correspondence: sdoropoulos@ihu.edu.gr
Abstract
The manual translation of unstructured team dialogue into the structured artifacts required for Information Technology
(IT) project governance is a critical bottleneck in modern information systems management. We introduce DevNous, a
Large Language Model-based (LLM) multi-agent expert system, to automate this unstructured-to-structured translation
process. DevNous integrates directly into team chat environments, identifying actionable intents from informal dialogue
and managing stateful, multi-turn workflows for core administrative tasks like automated task formalization and progress
summary synthesis. To quantitatively evaluate the system, we introduce a new benchmark of 160 realistic, interactive
conversational turns. The dataset was manually annotated with a multi-label ground truth and is publicly available. On
this benchmark, DevNous achieves an exact match turn accuracy of 81.3% and a multiset F1-Score of 0.845, providing
strong evidence for its viability. The primary contributions of this work are twofold: (1) a validated architectural pattern
for developing ambient administrative agents, and (2) the introduction of the first robust empirical baseline and public
benchmark dataset for this challenging problem domain.
Keywords Multi-Agent Systems, Large Language Models, Project Management, Agentic AI, Natural Language Processing
1 I ntroduction
The e ffective management of Information Technology (IT)
projects is a critical determinant of organizational success, yet
such projects are notoriously susceptible to failure [1, 2]. This
persistent challenge has spurred a reciprocal dynamic where
project management needs drive technological innovation, and
new technologies are deployed to enhance project execution
and communication [3]. Extensive research has documented the
application of Machine Learning (ML) and Deep Learning (DL)
models to project management challenges, establishing their
strategic value [4, 5, 6]. However, these tools typically func-
tion as ad hoc analytical systems, lacking deep integration into
the primary collaboration and communication workflows where
much of a project’s state is implicitly defined and negotiated.
This challenge is amplified by the operational reality of mod-
ern IT projects. Formal project management frameworks man-
date the maintenance of artifacts such as task backlogs and
progress reports, which are essential for tracking and control
across knowledge areas like scope, schedule, and communica-
tion [7]. However, in contemporary practice, particularly with
the rise of distributed teams reliant on chat-based platforms [8],
the information required to maintain these artifacts originates
from high-volume, unstructured conversations. The project man-
ager, whose role has evolved into that of a servant-leader and
facilitator [9, 10], bears the cognitive load of monitoring these
dialogues, identifying emergent tasks, and manually translating
informal requests into structured data and insights. This man-
ual process is not only resource-intensive but is also inherently
prone to error and omission, directly contributing to the manage-
rial shortcomings that precipitate project failure [1]. A critical
gap therefore exists between the informal, dynamic nature of
team collaboration and the structured data required for effective
project governance.
The emergence of Generative AI offers a path beyond this limita-
tion, enabling autonomous agents capable of operating directly
within these core communicative processes. The recent advent
of Large Language Models (LLMs) has catalysed a paradigm
shift, enabling machines to comprehend, generate, and reason
with human language at an unprecedented level of sophistication.
Despite this potential, the integration of LLMs as autonomous
agents within IT project workflows remains underexplored, pre-
senting a compelling opportunity for new research. The primary
challenge lies in translating the unstructured, informal, noisy,
and often fragmented discourse of team collaboration into struc-
tured, actionable project data and operations. Motivated by this
challenge, this paper proposes DevNous (from development
and the greek word νοῦς, meaning mind or intellect), a hier-
archical multi-agent system designed to operate autonomously
within communication-centric project environments. Our central
hypothesis is that an intelligent agent system can successfully
augment project execution by actively monitoring communica-
tion channels, interpreting conversational intent, and executing
administrative and logistical tasks. DevNous’s architecture is
designed to first classify incoming human messages for rele-
vance and then trigger specific agentic workflows. To validate
this framework, we developed and evaluated a prototype system
focusing on two core, high-frequency and artifact-heavy activi-
ties in IT projects. The primary contributions of this work are
twofold:
1. A Multi-Agent Architecture for LLM-based Project
Management: We present and validate a novel architecture
for autonomous agents in dialogue-based project manage-
ment. The proposed system, DevNous, uses functional spe-
cialization to classify actionable intents from informal team
arXiv:2508.08761v1 [cs.CL] 12 Aug 2025

DevNous: An LLM-Based Multi-Agent System for Grounding IT Project Management in Unstructured Conversation 2
The conceptual architecture of the DevNous system, illustrating its role as a bridge between unstructured team dialogue and structured project artifacts. The root agent orchestrates
specialized agents to ingest, classify, and statefully act upon conversational data, ultimately maintaining formal artifacts like the task backlog and progress updates.
Figure 1: DevNous Multi-Agent System
dialogue and orchestrate stateful, multi-turn workflows for
core administrative tasks, including automated task formal-
ization and progress report synthesis. This design avoids the
fragility of a monolithic agent while limiting the potential
coordination and computational overhead associated with
larger-scale agent swarms [11].
2. A Rigorous Evaluation Framework and Empirical Base-
line: We introduce a comprehensive methodology for eval-
uating this class of interactive agents. This includes a
new, 160-turn benchmark dataset of path-dependent dia-
logues generated by an interactive Synthetic Generation
Agent (SGA) and annotated by human annotators using a
multi-label annotation schema. The dataset is publicly avail-
able at https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.16755864.
Our experiments, conducted using this framework, show
that DevNous achieves a strong exact match turn accuracy
of 81.3%, providing the first robust empirical baseline for
this problem domain.
The proposed multi-agent architecture is validated through a
comparative evaluation where we demonstrate that DevNous
significantly outperforms a monolithic agent baseline. The re-
mainder of this paper is organized as follows: Section 2 provides
background, and Section 3 reviews related work. Sections 4 and
5 describe our proposed methodology and evaluation framework.
Section 6 presents our results while Section 7 discusses our
findings. Sections 8 and 9 present the study’s limitations and
conclude the paper, outlining directions for future research.
2 B ackground
Our research is at the intersection of project management
methodologies, the application of AI to project management,
and the design of LLM-agent architectures. This section pro-
vides background on these foundational domains to position and
contextualize our proposed contribution.
2.1 Project Management Methodologies
Project management has historically established a paradigm of
utilizing structured artifacts as the primary medium for project
execution and control. This formalization began from founda-
tional contributions for structured representations of work with
early visual scheduling tools like the Gantt chart [12] and core
management theories defining functions such as planning and
coordinating [13]. Sophisticated analytical techniques like the
deterministic Critical Path Method (CPM) [14] and the proba-
bilistic Program Evaluation and Review Technique (PERT) [15]
were proposed for managing schedule complexity. Additionally,
project management organizations like the AACE [16] and the
Project Management Institute (PMI) [ 17] contributed to this
formalization. The introduction of artifact-heavy best practices
within standards like the PMBOK [7] and PRINCE2 [18] further
reinforced this principle. This paradigm is evident in traditional
approaches where project progression is defined by sequential
artifacts [19], but is also apparent, in non-static structure, in
Agile [20] and Hybrid methodologies [21]. The core legacy of
this evolution is the systemic expectation that project status and
success are driven and defined by structured documentation.

DevNous: An LLM-Based Multi-Agent System for Grounding IT Project Management in Unstructured Conversation 3
The inherent rigidity of traditional approaches proved challeng-
ing in dynamic environments, prompting a shift toward more
adaptive methodologies. The artifact-centric paradigm encoun-
tered significant mutations when faced with the ever-changing
requirements of modern IT and software development. The
methodological shift that was catalysed by the Agile Mani-
festo [22] prioritized iterative value creation, flexibility, and con-
tinuous team interaction and feedback over static documentation
and processes. Frameworks such as Scrum [23], Kanban [24],
and Extreme Programming (XP) [25], alongside related method-
ologies like Lean [26] and Scaled Agile Framework (SAFe) [27],
operationalized this philosophy by augmenting and building the
project artifacts with insights from the high-frequency conver-
sations, interactions, and collaborative activities of the stake-
holders. At the same time, teams’ way of work was a ffected
by the widespread adoption of chat-based platforms for remote
collaboration [8]. The convergence of these trends has created
a profound operational dissonance: a persistent need for struc-
tured artifacts for governance must now be satisfied by manually
interpreting a high-volume, unstructured, and continuous stream
of team dialogue. These transformations emerged together with
the redefinition of the project manager’s role from a process
controller to that of a facilitator of this process [10, 9, 28, 29].
This manual “unstructured-to-structured” translation represents
the critical bottleneck of administrative overhead and data loss
that this research aims to address through agentic automation.
2.2 Artificial Intelligence in Project Management
The application of Artificial Intelligence (AI) to augment project
management processes is a well-researched domain, with nu-
merous systematic reviews detailing its broad impact [4, 5, 30].
Scholarly research has proposed a diverse collection of models
designed to optimize several project phases including initia-
tion, planning, control and execution. Significant research effort
has been dedicated to predictive analytics, particularly in areas
like project success, cost [31] and effort estimation [32]. Other
prominent application domains include duration forecasting [33],
risk management [34], resource optimization [ 35], project per-
formance monitoring [36] and adaptive digital twins [37]. The
adoption of AI technologies in project management is enhanc-
ing decision making and project execution success. However,
the unifying characteristic of these applications is that they are
designed as specialized analytical models that operate on well-
defined problem scopes. While some may parse natural language
text, they fundamentally lack the generalizable, cross-functional
reasoning required to interpret the ambiguous and dynamic na-
ture of chat-based discourse. Consequently, these systems are
unable to address the main challenge of orchestrating work as it
emerges from dynamic team dialogue. This capability gap neces-
sitates a new class of AI grounded in general-purpose language
understanding.
2.3 The Emergence of LLM-Based Agents
The new class of AI capable of general-purpose language un-
derstanding emerged from a paradigm shift within Natural Lan-
guage Processing (NLP). This evolution progressed from early
statistical language models [38, 39], through the development
of distributed word representations that mitigated the curse of
dimensionality [40, 41], and recurrent memory-enabled archi-
tectures like Long Short-Term Memory (LSTMs) [ 42]. The
critical breakthrough, however, was the development of the
Transformer architecture, which replaced recurrence with a
self-attention mechanism, enabling unprecedented scalability
and performance on long-range dependencies [43]. This archi-
tecture paved the way for large-scale pre-training, producing
models like BERT and GPT that learn general language rep-
resentations from massive datasets [ 44, 45]. The application
of scaling laws [46] and alignment techniques like Reinforce-
ment Learning from Human Feedback (RLHF) [47] has resulted
in today’s LLMs that exhibit general-purpose reasoning and
emergent problem-solving abilities far exceeding their predeces-
sors [48, 49].
The generalizable reasoning capabilities of these LLMs have
enabled the development of a new generation of agents, realizing
a long-standing vision in AI of systems possessing properties
of autonomy, reactivity, and social ability [50, 51]. Unlike spe-
cialized models, these LLM-based agents can perform complex,
multi-step tasks by dynamically drafting and executing plans us-
ing input from their environment. These agents typically involve
modules for defining a profile (role, persona), handling memory
(context), planning (task decomposition and orchestration), and
taking actions (tool use) [51].
The behavior of an agent is shaped by its profile, often specified
via a handcrafted prompt. Research has shown that assign-
ing specific roles and personas significantly improves perfor-
mance in multi-agent systems by providing traits, focus, and
constrains [52, 53, 54]. The agent’s behavior is also directly
influenced by all the available information in the provided con-
text. To overcome the limitations of limited context windows,
agents can utilize memory mechanisms. These are often hybrid,
combining short-term memory like the recent conversation his-
tory with long-term memory stores for information archival and
retrieval, which is what we use in our proposed architecture.
Planning is crucial for agent autonomy and task execution ac-
curacy. Early methods relied on simple in-context prompting,
which was significantly improved by Chain-of-Thought (CoT)
prompting that elicits step-by-step reasoning from the LLM [55].
The current state-of-the-art has moved towards more dynamic
and interactive planning like the ReAct framework that demon-
strated the importance of combining reasoning with action and
observation, allowing agents to adapt their plans based on en-
vironmental feedback [ 56]. Our work adopts a ReAct-style
feedback loop but constrains it within a structured, hierarchical
coordination suitable for our domain.
Finally, agents derive much of their capabilities from the use
of external tools. This can range from calling APIs and execut-
ing code to querying databases or using Retrieval-Augmented
Generation (RAG) mechanisms [57]. Seminal work in this area
includes frameworks that teach LLMs to use tools by observing
examples [58] and systems that orchestrate multiple specialist
models as tools [59]. The ability to ground actions in a reliable
set of tools is critical for mitigating hallucination and allowing
agents to affect external environments [60]. The use of tools is
particularly important for our “unstructured-to-structured” trans-
lation for achieving schema-based translations and syncing the
project’s reality with and from external project management
software.

DevNous: An LLM-Based Multi-Agent System for Grounding IT Project Management in Unstructured Conversation 4
3 R elated Work
In the domain of project management, scholarly work has only
recently begun to explore LLMs mainly though a non-agentic
perspective. Several studies have focused on the human factors
of LLM adoption, examining the dynamics and user acceptance
of AI assistants in Agile meetings [61] or the organizational fac-
tors influencing a project manager’s appropriation of generative
AI tools [62]. Other research has investigated the application
of LLMs to well-bounded PM tasks, such as automating the
generation of user stories or creating reports for Agile cere-
monies [63, 64]. While valuable, these studies predominantly
treat LLMs as powerful assistants for specific tasks, rather than
as autonomous agents deeply integrated into the team’s opera-
tional workflow.
A more involved agent-based approach is evident in the domain
of software engineering, where the distinction between stan-
dalone LLMs and tool-using agents is well defined [ 65]. The
potential of agent-based design approach is evidenced by the
success of multi-agent systems in systems such as ChatDev [54]
and frameworks like AutoGen [66] that can autonomously per-
form complex development tasks. These multi-agent systems
have been designed to autonomously handle development life-
cycles, with agents assuming roles like managers, programmers,
and testers to coordinate on tasks such as code generation from
high-level requirements [67, 54].
In the PM domain, agent-based recent work utilizes LLM-
Swarms to examine their effect in agile project management by
coordinating agent clusters representing key roles such as man-
agers and engineers [68]. Another approach is seen in simulation
frameworks like CogniSim, which evaluates agent interactions
based on established enterprise practices such as SAFe [ 69].
However, these agent-based systems are designed to operate
on well-structured problem definitions, such as formal require-
ments, scenarios or code repositories. They are not architected
to handle high-velocity conversational environments of an IT
project team. Consequently, a research gap persists at the in-
tersection of these fields. To our knowledge, no prior work
has presented the design, implementation and evaluation of a
multi-agent system specifically architected to autonomously per-
form coordinative and administrative tasks by interpreting the
informal dialogue of live collaborative environments.
4 M ethodology
To address the research gap identified in the literature, we de-
signed and implemented DevNous, a multi-agent expert system
for autonomous project management within unstructured con-
versation environments. This section details the formal problem
definition, the system’s architecture, and the methodology un-
derpinning its operation, which was validated through the imple-
mentation of two critical and high-overhead agile project work-
flows: automated task formalization and automated progress
synthesis.
4.1 Problem Formulation
We formally define the problem of autonomous project manage-
ment in a chat-based, unstructured conversation environment
as a sequential decision-making process. The system operates
on a continuous stream of messages m1, m2,..., mt, where each
message mi is a tuple (ci, ui,τ i) representing the content ci, user
ui, and timestampτi. At any time t, the system’s knowledge is
captured in a state st = (Bt, Ht, Wt), which includes the project
artifact repository Bt (e.g., the task backlog and team members
information), the recent conversation history Ht, and the active
workflow state Wt. The core challenge is to learn a policy,π(·),
that maps the current state st and a new incoming message mt+1
to an optimal action at+1 from a predefined action spaceA:
at+1 =π(st, mt+1) (1)
The action spaceA includes high-level coordinative and admin-
istrative functions, such as:
A =

CREATE_TASK,
CONTINUE_WORKFLOW,
UPDATE_CONTEXT,
GENERATE_SUMMARY,
NO_ACTION

.
The primary difficulty lies in the nature of mt+1, where the con-
tent ct+1 is unstructured natural language. Therefore, the policy
π(·) must perform complex semantic interpretation. DevNous
is a hierarchical multi-agent system designed to implement this
policy, with LLMs serving as the core reasoning engine for
interpreting (st, mt+1) and selecting an appropriate action.
4.2 System Architecture
The system’s policy π(·) is implemented with a hierarchical
multi-agent architecture that decomposes the main policy π(·)
into three distinct sub-policies, each implemented by a spe-
cialized agent, as depicted in Figure 1. A central root agent
functions as orchestrator, receiving all incoming messages and
delegating tasks to a team of specialized sub-agents based on
the output of the message classification agent. The root agent
orchestrates three specialized sub-agents: a) the message clas-
sifier sub-agent for actionable intent recognition, b) the task
creator sub-agent for backlog management, and c) the summary
generator sub-agent for report synthesis.
The classifier agent implements the actionable intent recognition
policy (πclassify) which maps the input state and message to the
highest-confidence (Category,Action) tuple it identifies. Based
on this output the primary action to be taken at each turn is
decided:
(kt+1, at+1) =πclassify(st, mt+1). (2)
Here kt+1∈K is the predicted category and at+1∈A is the
action, where
K =

NEW_TASK,
EXISTING_TASK,
WORKFLOW_RESPONSE,
SUMMARY_TRIGGER,
REGULAR_CONVERSATION

.
The root agent based onπclassify conditionally invokes the task
creator policy (πtask) or summary generator policy ( πsummary).
These sub-agents implement stateful workflow policies that may
span multiple interactive turns.

DevNous: An LLM-Based Multi-Agent System for Grounding IT Project Management in Unstructured Conversation 5
Table 1: DevNous Agent Architecture: Roles, Personas, and Mechanisms.
Agent Role / Persona Core Responsibility Primary Mechanism / Output
Root Agent Orchestrator /
Supervisor
Message triage and sub-agent delegation based
on context, message category, and intent.
Delegation: Executes the policy (π(·)) that
maps classified intent to a specific sub-agent
transfer. Executes Sub-agent transfers.
Classifier Intent Analyzer /
Systematic Analyst
Classify user messages into a predefined set of
intents (Category and Action tuples).
Intent Classification. Returns structured JSON
output corresponding to an action inA with
confidence score.
Task Creator Task Facilitator /
Interactive
Manage a human-in-the-loop (HITL) process to
formalize unstructured requests into tasks.
Stateful HITL: unstructured-to-structured
translator with persistent workflow states (Wt).
Outputs structured tasks.
Summary
Generator
Report Synthesizer
/ Factual Observer
Analyze conversation history and project data
to generate daily progress reports.
Conversational Data Synthesis: Retrieves,
analyzes, and aggregates data from Ht and Bt,
producing a structured textual summary.
Generates structured reports for team members.
The task formalization policy (πtask), executed by the task creator
agent, accepts the message and the current state (st, mt+1), and
produces, through a human-in-the-loop dialogue, an updated
artifact repository B′, where a new task has been added:
B′ =πtask(st, mt+1). (3)
The summary generation policy (πsummary), executed by the sum-
mary generator agent, takes as input the current state and mes-
sage (st, mt+1) and produces, through a human-in-the-loop pro-
cess, a structured, textual summary:
Summary =πsummary(st, mt+1). (4)
The full orchestration policyπ(·) is therefore a conditional hier-
archical composition of these sub-policies.
The core operational logic of this hierarchy is detailed in the mes-
sage handling workflow, presented in Algorithm 1. This control
loop illustrates how the system triages incoming conversational
messages and routes control to the appropriate specialized agent
based on classified actionable intent and current workflow state.
The return statement transfers control and yields either (a) no
outward message (null), (b) the user response and the updated
state from the invoked sub-policy (e.g., the updated backlog
B′ fromπtask or the Summary fromπsummary), or (c) a custom
generated response (GenerateResponse) from the root policy.
To ensure proper unstructured-to-structured translation all sub-
agent outputs are validated against predefined JSON Schemas
which are defined in Tables 6, 7, 8 of Appendix A.3.
4.3 Multi-Agent Team Configuration
The per agent functional separation in our architecture is
achieved through role-defining profiles and instructions, func-
tionality based tool actions, memory access and cross agent
planning. Each agent’s behavior is governed by a handcrafted
profile, implemented as a detailed instruction prompt. These
prompts go beyond simple persona assignment to include behav-
ioral constraints, workflow logic, and guidelines for tool use as
detailed in Table 1, a technique shown to improve multi-agent
performance [53]. The complete set of instructions is presented
in Appendix A.4.
Agent actions within the DevNous framework are executed
through a tool-based abstraction layer that the agents interact
Algorithm 1 DevNous Orchestration Policyπ(·)
1: procedure ExecutePolicy(st, mt+1)
2: ▷ st: current state (Bt, Ht, Wt); mt+1: new message
3: ( kt+1, at+1)←πclassify(st, mt+1) ▷ Implemented by the Classifier Agent
4: if at+1∈{ NO_ACTION, UPDATE_CONTEXT} then
5: return null ▷ Passively update state without responding
6: else if at+1 = CREATE_TASK then
7: returnπtask(st, mt+1)
8: else if at+1 = GENERATE_SUMMARY then
9: returnπsummary(st, mt+1)
10: else if at+1 = CONTINUE_WORKFLOW∧ st.Wt.isActive then
11: if st.Wt.type = task_workflow then
12: returnπtask(st, mt+1)
13: else if st.Wt.type = summary_workflow then
14: returnπsummary(st, mt+1)
15: end if
16: else
17: return GenerateResponse(st, mt+1)
18: end if
19: end procedure
with and use to update the state (st). The LLM produces struc-
tured calls to a set of registered Python functions, categorized by
functionality into four primary tool classes: (1)Memory tools, re-
sponsible for managing session state (e.g., memorize_string,
get_conversation_history); (2) Communication tools ,
which interface with chat systems for message ingestion and dis-
patch (e.g., process_message, send_message); (3) Project
management tools, which bridge the LLM with external task-
tracking platforms (e.g., get_tasks, update_task); and (4)
Workflow tools, which support human-in-the-loop operations
by managing process state transitions (e.g., start_workflow,
end_workflow). The full list of tools is detailed in Table 5 of
the Appendix A.2. The agents have access to these tools based
on the principle of least privilege [70]. The separation of access
to tools and processes acts as a security mechanism, with agents
having authorization over a specified subset of the action and
memory space.
DevNous implements a hybrid memory architecture to maintain
proper context state across multi-turn interactions. Short-term
memory consists of the recent conversation history (Ht) while its
long-term memory utilizes a persistent state managed through

DevNous: An LLM-Based Multi-Agent System for Grounding IT Project Management in Unstructured Conversation 6
dedicated tools, with information such as the active workflow sta-
tus (Wt), team member data, and a cache of tasks (Bt) retrieved
from external systems.
The system’s planning methodology employs a hybrid strategy
that combines structured delegation-based coordination pattern
with dynamic agent transfers and tool execution. A key heuristic
for stability is that sub-agents are disallowed from peer-to-peer
transfers and must return control to the root agent after task
execution. At the sub-agent level, execution is adaptive, based
on a feedback-driven methodology inspired by the ReAct frame-
work’s thought-action-observation triplets [56], allowing agents
to dynamically adjust their behavior based on tool outputs and
user responses.
The specific orchestration of these components to execute the
two primary workflows of automated task formalization and
progress synthesis is detailed in Appendix A.1.
4.4 Handling Conversational Ambiguity
A primary methodological contribution of DevNous is its ability
to operate robustly within noisy, unstructured chat environments.
This is achieved through two key heuristics engineered into
the agent profiles and the central orchestration logic and thus
affecting the system’s policy (π(·)):
1. Cross-Talk Detection: Agents are explicitly instructed to
differentiate between messages directed at them and general
team conversation (cross-talk). The classifier agent enables
the root agent to passively observe instead of intrusively
responding to incoming messages.
2. Workflow State Continuity: To prevent contextual drift
during multi-turn interactions, the active workflow state
(Wt) is a primary input for reasoning. The classifier is
instructed to interpret new messages as possible responses
to an active workflow to maintain conversational coherence.
5 E v aluationFramework
The evaluation of LLM-based agents is an open research prob-
lem, as their interactive and dynamic nature presents challenges
that cannot be fully captured by traditional benchmarks [51]. A
critical shortcoming of existing approaches is a focus on task-
level accuracy that often neglects the path-planning complexities
of real-world conversational workflows, leading to a disconnec-
tion between theoretical performance and practical e ffective-
ness [71]. This shortcoming dictates the necessity of developing
an evaluation methodology that truly reflects the performance
of proposed agentic architectures. While various objective and
subjective evaluation methods exist, the foundation of any rig-
orous quantitative analysis is a high-quality, domain-specific
benchmark dataset.
However, in the domain of IT project management, there is
a distinct lack of publicly available datasets that capture the
informal, multi-threaded nature of chat-based team collabora-
tion. Existing datasets from software development communities,
such as the DISCO dataset [ 72], were examined but found to
be unsuitable. These datasets, while valuable for a plethora
of analysis and research problems, do not contain the specific
coordinative and administrative speech flows (e.g., task creation
from informal requests, contextual updates, managerial discus-
sions, summary generation requirements) that are the primary
focus of our work. Additionally, to fully evaluate our system
the interaction of an IT team with the agent would be required
and thus static datasets are insufficient. This gap necessitated
the creation and annotation of a new benchmark dataset to en-
able a valid evaluation of the DevNous system. The following
subsections detail the dataset generation, annotation schema, the
evaluation protocol, the specific metrics used in this evaluation,
as well as implementation details.
5.1 Dataset Generation
Procuring informal, project-specific internal chat exchanges
from active IT teams, along with data on their members and task
backlogs, is challenging because of privacy and intellectual-
property concerns. To address the lack of this required in-
teractive dataset, we adopted a synthetic data generation ap-
proach. This methodology has been found effective for creating
datasets for intent classification tasks, especially when using
larger LLMs [73]. Rather than creating data using a static single
LLM query, we engineered SGA, a separate, context-aware con-
versational agent tasked with performing a realistic turn-based
interaction of a simulated team with DevNous.
The SGA was powered by Anthropic’s Claude-Sonnet 3.7 [74],
a state-of-the-art language model that we have found to per-
form well in context-aware language understanding [75]. The
instruction set we used provides the SGA with a team persona
and the team members info together with the initial list of tasks
backlog (Bt). The complete prompt used for the data generation
is presented in Appendix A.4.5. The agent was instructed to
follow realistic conversational patterns and constraints derived
from real-world developer chats. The core of the methodology
is a dynamic, turn-based interaction loop:
1. The SGA generates a human-simulated message based on
the recent conversational history, including DevNous’s pre-
vious responses.
2. This message is sent to the DevNous system, which pro-
cesses it and generates a response.
3. The full interaction (human input and DevNous output) is
then added to the conversational context.
4. The updated context is used by the SGA to generate the
next, human-simulated message.
This interactive process was repeated to generate a benchmark
dataset consisting of 8 independent, multi-turn conversational
dialogues. Each dialogue contains 20 human-simulated turns,
for a full benchmark of 160 human turns and 169 message
classifications (category and action tuples). This approach en-
sures the resulting dialogues are not only realistic but also path-
dependent, providing a challenging, realistically simulated eval-
uation dataset for our system. The complete, annotated bench-
mark dataset is openly available in Zenodo at
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.16755864.
5.2 Annotation Process
We followed a turn-based, multi-label annotation methodology.
Each of the 160 human-simulated turns was manually annotated

DevNous: An LLM-Based Multi-Agent System for Grounding IT Project Management in Unstructured Conversation 7
Table 2: Definitions for message category and action annotation labels
Message Category Definition
NEW_TASK Assigned to the first message in a thread that proposes a new, untracked task. Untracked tasks are those not present
in the Backlog (Bt) or in the recent conversation (Ht).
EXISTING_TASK A message referencing a tracked task.
WORKFLOW_RESPONSE Assigned to messages that are direct responses to an agent’s or user’s question within an active, multi-turn
workflow (e.g., task creation or summary confirmation).
REGULAR_CONVERSATION Assigned to cross-talk, acknowledgements, or discussions not containing actionable project management
information.
SUMMARY_TRIGGER Assigned to commands or contextually infered need to generate a summary report.
Action Type Definition and Typical Pairing
CREATE_TASK Initiate a workflow to create a new task. Typically paired with NEW_TASK Message Category.
UPDATE_CONTEXT Silently observe and update information for a previously established topic. Typically paired with
EXISTING_TASK Message Category.
CONTINUE_WORKFLOW Take the next step in an active, multi-turn workflow. Typically paired with WORKFLOW_RESPONSE Message
Category.
NO_ACTION Do not respond or record information. Typically paired with REGULAR_CONVERSATION Message Category.
GENERATE_SUMMARY Initiate the summary generation workflow. Typically paired with SUMMARY_TRIGGER Message Category.
with a multiset of actionable intent (MessageCategory, Action)
tuples, allowing for duplicates if required. Each tuple represents
the message’s category, function or goal and the action (at+1),
which defines the ideal step the agent should plan to take in
response to the message (mt+1) and the current state (st) based
on their instructed policy ( π(·)). The definitions for the five
possible message category and the five action labels, along with
their typical pairings, are detailed in Table 2.
To ensure the reliability and objectivity of this annotation pro-
cess, we conducted an inter-annotator agreement study. A sec-
ond, independent annotator was trained on the definitions out-
lined in our schema and tasked with labeling a randomly selected
subset of 40 turns (25% of the dataset). We then measured the
agreement between the two sets of annotations using the multiset
F1-score (see Eq.9), which is well-suited for this multi-label,
multiset tasks. The analysis yielded a high agreement score of
Fagreement
1,multiset = 0.925. This “almost perfect” level of agreement
confirms that our annotation schema is su fficiently clear, and
well-defined to be applied objectively by different raters, provid-
ing a reliable ground truth for our subsequent experiments.
5.3 Evaluation Protocol
Our evaluation, based on our benchmark dataset, proceeds in
two primary stages as detailed in Figure 2. First, to validate our
architectural claims, we conduct a comparative analysis against
a monolithic agent baseline. Second, we conduct a primary
end-to-end evaluation to assess the performance of DevNous
in its natural, stateful “live run” interacting with ecologically
simulated team-dialogues.
To overcome the challenge of path-dependency in our inter-
active dataset and enable a fair comparison, we developed a
stateless, turn-by-turn evaluation protocol where each system is
tested on identical inputs and corresponding contextual history
at each turn. To confirm the validity of this protocol, we con-
ducted a preliminary meta-evaluation. This analysis measured
the consistency between the agent’s decisions in the “live” ver-
sus “stateless” conditions, confirming that the protocol, while
representing a more challenging test condition, is a reliable
proxy for assessing relative performance.
5.4 Evaluation Metrics
The agent’s performance was evaluated by logging and extract-
ing the multiset of (Category, Action) tuples it produced per turn.
The predicted multiset for each turn was compared against the
ground-truth multiset. We report on three primary metrics to
provide a detailed view of the system’s performance.
Exact Match Turn Accuracy (Subset Accuracy) This met-
ric measures the percentage of conversational turns where the
agent’s multiset of (Category, Action) tuples is an exact match
for the ground-truth’s multiset, dictating end-to-end correctness.
A turn is considered successful if all tuples are identified and
matched perfectly, with no missing or hallucinated actions.
Label-wise F1-Score To provide insights of the policy’s per-
formance on specific tasks, we report the label-wise F1-score.
Each unique (Category, Action) tuple is treated as a distinct class
label.
Multiset F1-Score ( F1,multiset) To account for partial credit
in multiset turns and to properly handle duplicates, following
Welleck et al. [76], we adopt a multiset-aware F1 score. This
metric extends the standard F1 score by respecting label frequen-
cies. This means that if a label appears twice in the ground truth
but is only predicted once, this omission correctly contributes to
the False Negative count, rather than being ignored.
We define the global counts for True Positives (T P), False Posi-
tives (FP), and False Negatives (FN ) over the entire dataset of
N turns. Let C be the total number of unique (Category, Action)
tuples. For each turn i and each unique tuple j, let gi, j be the
ground-truth count and pi, j be the predicted count. The global

DevNous: An LLM-Based Multi-Agent System for Grounding IT Project Management in Unstructured Conversation 8
SGA DevNous Logs Human
Annotators Data Live Run
Score
mt
π(S t−1, mt)
Benchmark
Dataset
Turn:
S t−1, mt
DevNous
(Multi-Agent)
Baseline
(Monolithic)
Compare Comparative
Metrics
(a) Data Generation (b) Data Annotation & Live-run Evaluation
(c) Turn Preparation (d) Stateless Turn-based Evaluation
Figure 2: The SGA interacts with DevNous to produce conversational logs that are annotated to create a benchmark dataset and
used for live run scoring. Starting from the benchmark dataset, turns (state history S t−1 and message mt) are processed through
both DevNous (hierarchical) and Baseline (monolithic) systems for comparative analysis.
counts are then:
TP =
NX
i=1
CX
j=1
mingi, j, pi, j
, (5)
FP =
NX
i=1
CX
j=1
pi, j− min(gi, j, pi, j), (6)
FN =
NX
i=1
CX
j=1
gi, j− min(gi, j, pi, j). (7)
The multiset F1-Score is the harmonic mean of the resulting
global precision and recall:
F1,multiset = 2· TP
2· TP + FP + FN. (8)
Inter-Run Agreement via Multiset F1 To evaluate the stabil-
ity of model predictions across independent runs, we compute
the Multiset F1-score [76] between the outputs of two model
instances on the same dataset. This metric extends the standard
F1-score by accounting for repeated labels, treating predictions
as multisets of tuples. It is identical in form to the multiset F1
used for model-vs-ground-truth evaluation (see Eq. 8), but here
applied between two prediction sets.
Let p(1)
i, j and p(2)
i, j denote the count of the j-th unique tuple in
the predictions of runs 1 and 2, respectively, for input i. The
inter-run multiset F1-score is defined as:
Fagreement
1,multiset =
2·
NP
i=1
CP
j=1
min

p(1)
i, j, p(2)
i, j

NP
i=1
CP
j=1

p(1)
i, j + p(2)
i, j
. (9)
This formulation reflects the overlap between predictions, while
preserving the frequency of label tuples.
5.5 Implementation Details
DevNous was implemented in Python 3, leveraging Google’s
Agent Development Kit (ADK) [77] for its hierarchical agent
architecture, state management, and event-driven tool invocation.
Google’s Gemini Flash 2.5 model [ 78] was used as the back-
ing LLM during DevNous evaluation due to its good balance
of speed, cost of inference and performance. Data validation
and structured outputs are enforced using Pydantic, and integra-
tion with external services is accomplished via their respective
Python SDKs. The full instruction prompts for each agent are
provided in the Appendix A.4.
6 R esults
This section presents the aggregated quantitative results from
our benchmark evaluation. We first present the results of our
controlled comparative analysis to validate our proposed ar-
chitecture. We then report on the end-to-end performance of
the DevNous system in its intended, stateful environment, as
detailed in Figure 2.
6.1 Comparative Architectural Analysis
We evaluated and compared two distinct architectures:
1. DevNous (Multi-agent Expert System): Our proposed
system, featuring a multi-agent team of orchestrated spe-
cialized sub-agents as described in Section 4.2.
2. Monolithic Agent (Baseline): A baseline agent designed
to represent a simpler, non-specialized approach. This agent
combines all functionalities into a single instruction prompt
tailored for single agent architecture and has access to the
exact same set of tools as DevNous. The goal of this base-
line is to isolate the e ffect of our proposed multi-agent
architecture.
Both systems were implemented using the same backing LLMs
to ensure a controlled comparison of architectural impact. To
conduct a fair, controlled comparison on our path-dependent
dataset, we developed a “stateless” protocol, as detailed in Fig-
ure 2. In this protocol, for each of the 160 turns that were
generated via live interaction with DevNous, the agent is re-
instantiated and provided with the full, identical historical con-
text from the original live run log before the current message.
The provided context included the complete log of the simu-
lated team messages and DevNous responses allowing a direct
comparison of their respective policies.

DevNous: An LLM-Based Multi-Agent System for Grounding IT Project Management in Unstructured Conversation 9
Table 3: Comparative Performance on turn-based evaluation (left) and live-run results (right) across 160 Turns.
Turn-based stateless evaluation Live run
Model DevNous (Multi-Agent) Baseline (Monolithic) DevNous (Multi-Agent)
Exact Match
Turn Acc.
Multiset F1 Exact Match
Turn Acc.
Multiset F1 Exact Match
Turn Acc.
Multiset F1
Gemini Flash 2.5 0.700 0.742 0.550 0.660 0.813 0.845
Gemini Pro 2.5 0.687 0.737 0.459 0.335 - -
GPT-5-mini 0.581 0.651 0.531 0.631 - -
LlaMA 4 Maverick 0.575 0.639 0.300 0.364 - -
Table 4: Label-wise Performance by Category-Action Tuple
Category-Action Pair (Label) Precision Recall F1-Score Support (N)
(WORKFLOW_RESPONSE, CONTINUE_WORKFLOW) 0.917 0.965 0.940 57
(NEW_TASK, CREATE_TASK) 0.941 0.889 0.914 18
(SUMMARY_TRIGGER, GENERATE_SUMMARY) 0.875 0.875 0.875 8
(REGULAR_CONVERSATION, NO_ACTION) 0.929 0.743 0.825 35
(EXISTING_TASK, UPDATE_CONTEXT) 0.740 0.860 0.796 43
(EXISTING_TASK, NO_ACTION) 0.400 0.250 0.308 8
The results, presented in Table 3, show a significant perfor-
mance gap. The hierarchical DevNous architecture decisively
outperformed the monolithic baseline, achieving an Exact Match
Accuracy of 70.0%, a 15-point improvement over the baseline’s
55.0% on our primary model (Gemini Flash 2.5). Subsequently,
we repeat our experiments with three additional models to fur-
ther validate our claim. In all cases the hierarchical architecture
outperforms the baseline performance.
While the quantitative results demonstrate a significant perfor-
mance gap, a qualitative analysis of the error patterns reveal that
they did not differ only in accuracy but they exhibited different
types of failure.
The monolithic baseline agent was prone to foundational failures
in comprehension and procedure. We identified four recurring
error patterns:
1. Role Confusion: The agent frequently failed to maintain its
identity as an administrative tool. For instance, in response
to a user asking, “anyone ordering lunch?”, the baseline
incorrectly adopted a human persona, replying with, “I’m
not hungry right now, thanks for asking!”.
2. Procedural Incompetence: It struggled to follow the cor-
rect, multi-step tool use protocols required for workflows.
3. Format Adherence Failure: The baseline often failed to
produce the required structured JSON outputs.
4. Message Classification: Without a specialized classifier,
the monolithic agent’s accuracy in predicting the correct
(Category, Action) tuple was significantly lower.
In contrast, the multi-agent DevNous system exhibited more sub-
tle errors. Notably, when testing DevNous with Gemini 2.5 Pro
the system did not outperform the more cost-effective Gemini
Flash 2.5 model. When observing its incorrect actions we no-
ticed role confusion but of a different type to that of the baseline
models. For instance, in a conversational thread where a team
member announced the birth of their child, while the Gemini 2.5
Flash model correctly classified the subsequent congratulatory
messages as (REGULAR_CONVERSATION, NO_ACTION)
and remained silent as instructed, the more powerful model,
chose to “break character”, overriding its policy to generate a
personable, congratulatory response. This example showcased
that while the failures of the monolithic agent were failures of
basic competence, the failures of the hierarchical agent, using
larger models, were often sophisticated edge cases of a system
grappling with the tension between adhering to a strict policy
and engaging in more natural, human-like interaction.
6.2 End-to-End System Performance (Live Run)
To measure performance in a natural, stateful environment, we
present the results of the “live run” where the agent processes the
dialogue sequentially, building and maintaining its own conver-
sational memory turn-by-turn. This protocol is used to establish
the primary performance of the DevNous system.
The evaluation benchmark comprised a total of 160 human-
simulated turns, created via the interaction of the SGA with
DevNous, which were annotated with 169 distinct ground-truth
(Category, Action) tuples. Across all dialogues, six unique
category-action pairs emerged as the primary classes for eval-
uation: (NEW_TASK, CREATE_TASK), (EXISTING_TASK,
UPDATE_CONTEXT), (EXISTING_TASK, NO_ACTION),
(WORKFLOW_RESPONSE, CONTINUE_WORKFLOW),
(REGULAR_CONVERSATION, NO_ACTION), and (SUM-
MARY_TRIGGER, GENERATE_SUMMARY).
The performance of the DevNous system in the “live run” is
presented in Table 3. The multi-agent system achieved an exact
match turn accuracy of 81.3%. This indicates a high degree
of reliability, with the agent correctly identifying and fulfilling
the complete set of actionable intents in over four out of five
conversational turns. The multiset F1-Score of 0.845 further
supports this, showing that even in turns with partial errors, the
agent’s output had a high degree of overlap with the correct
category-actions tuples.
To evaluate and diagnose the system’s performance, we calcu-

DevNous: An LLM-Based Multi-Agent System for Grounding IT Project Management in Unstructured Conversation 10
lated the label-wise metrics for each unique category-action pair,
as detailed in Table 4. The agent demonstrated excellent per-
formance on its most frequent and critical tasks, particularly in
handling workflow responses (F1=0.940) and identifying new
tasks (F1=0.914) while silently observing during regular con-
versations (F1=0.825). This high performance on workflow
initiation and continuity actions confirm that the system success-
fully translates unstructured chat into structured project artifacts,
despite the multi-turn context and the intermittent cross-talk
interruptions.
The lowest-performing category was (EXISTING_TASK,
NO_ACTION) (F1 =0.308). A manual review of these er-
rors reveals the agent’s misinterpretation of user messages that
are intended as casual commentary, social support, or vent-
ing, as actionable task updates. For instance, a message like
“Ugh, this bug is tricky ” was often misclassified as an UP-
DATE_CONTEXT action, when the user’s intent was simply to
express frustration. This reveals the agent’s bias towards action,
often interpreting task-adjacent mentions as formal status up-
dates worthy of being recorded. Another example was the mes-
sage “Hmm cookies could be it, I’ll check. @edavis you can tell
them we now support session persistence ac...” where the ground
truth expected (EXISTING_TASK, NO_ACTION) but the sys-
tem predicted (EXISTING_TASK, UPDATE_CONTEXT). In
this example it could be argued that the task’s context now
includes a cookies related investigation, however, there is no
contextual evidence that this has occurred and should be part of
the task-related updates. Finally, in the message “ Margherita
for me! @mchen nice catch on the CI issue (:thumbsup:) I was
wondering why it was so slow” the annotation expected (REGU-
LAR_CONVERSATION, no_action) while the system predicted
(EXISTING_TASK, UPDATE_CONTEXT). This suggests that
the agent struggles to differentiate between the pragmatic func-
tion of a correctly categorised message (e.g., referencing a CI
issue) and its semantic content (e.g., offering social encourage-
ment), leading to incorrect action planning.
6.3 Turn-based meta-evaluation
To assess the validity of our stateless, turn-by-turn evaluation
protocol we conducted a meta-evaluation. We compared the
predictions from the “live run” of DevNous with those from
its “stateless run” on the same dataset. The analysis yielded
an inter-run multiset F1 agreement score of 0.815. This strong
score indicates a high degree of consistency between the two
experimental conditions. It confirms that while the stateless
protocol represents a more challenging test (as evidenced by the
drop in exact match turn accuracy from 81.3% to 70.0%), the
agent’s decisions remain largely consistent.
7 D iscussion
The results of our evaluation provide strong support for our
central hypothesis that a hierarchical multi-agent system can
effectively enhance IT project management execution by inter-
preting and acting on unstructured team dialogue. Both quanti-
tative and qualitative analyses, grounded in synthetic data that
we generated and manually annotated, reinforce this conclusion.
An exact match turn accuracy of 81.3% (Multiset F1-Score of
0.845) across a challenging, multi-dialogue benchmark demon-
strates that an LLM-powered agent can, in the majority of cases,
correctly interpret the complex flow of team chat and execute
the appropriate administrative action. In this capacity, DevNous
serves as a successful “distraction-free enabler”, a system that
can partially offload the cognitive burden of monitoring, insights
extraction and curation from human project managers and team
members.
The analysis of the system’s errors provides equally valuable
insights into key trade-offs. The lowest-performing categories re-
veal an engineered bias towards action. The agent was prompted
to prioritize capturing all potential task-related information,
which, while increasing the recall of true updates, led to misclas-
sifying some social commentary as formal status updates. This
highlights the balance between maximizing information capture
and minimizing conversational intrusion as a critical but tunable
parameter in administrative agent design.
Our work proposes and validates a novel interaction paradigm
for administrative agents. Unlike typical “command-and-
response” assistants that require explicit user invocation, De-
vNous is designed as an ambient, observational assistant that
co-exists within the team’s native communication channels. Its
primary mode of operation is to passively listen capturing emer-
gent tasks and context without interrupting the natural flow of
human-to-human collaboration. It intervenes to formalize in-
formation or initiate a workflow only when a clear, actionable
intent is detected. This paradigm, where the agent’s role is to
prevent valuable information and ideas from “slipping through
the cracks” of a high-velocity chat, contrasts with the more ex-
plicitly invoked, tool-like LLM applications commonly seen in
project management LLM-integration literature.
The proposed multi-agent architecture is the technical enabler for
this paradigm. Attempting to manage the diverse responsibilities
of ambient observation, intent classification, and stateful work-
flow execution within a single, monolithic prompt is a notori-
ously fragile approach. Our work demonstrates that architectural
specialization is a critical strategy for building reliable agents
demonstrated by the high F1-scores for core workflows like task
creation (F1=0.914) and workflow continuation (F1 =0.940).
The emergent multi-action execution we observed, where the
system successfully orchestrated a sequence of sub-agent calls,
is strong evidence of the architecture’s ability to handle complex
scenarios. We therefore propose this combination of an ambient
interaction paradigm and a hierarchical intent-based architec-
ture as a generalizable design pattern for building reliable and
socially aware administrative agents.
Finally, the system’s operation demonstrates the potential for
agents to function as socio-technical catalysts for process for-
malization. The proposed human-in-the-loop workflows and the
non-intrusive, via no_action classifications, human-to-team inter-
actions, create a low-friction human and machine co-existance.
This pathway gently guides a team to turn vague, informal ideas
into concrete, tracked structured project management artifacts
helping to instil and reinforce best practices in a natural, conver-
sational manner.
8 L imitations
This study has several limitations that provide clear directions
for future research. First, our evaluation relies on a synthetic
benchmark dataset. While our interactive generation process

DevNous: An LLM-Based Multi-Agent System for Grounding IT Project Management in Unstructured Conversation 11
was designed to be ecologically valid, the dataset size (160
turns) is modest, and it cannot fully capture the unpredictable
and diverse nature of real-world human teams. Future work
could deploy DevNous in a pilot study within a real IT project
team to assess its performance, generalizability, user perception
and impact on team dynamics.
Second, our evaluation focused on the accuracy of the agent’s
conversational decision-making (Category, Action) tuple ful-
filment and did not include a formal human evaluation of the
quality of the final generated artifacts. While prior work has
established that modern LLMs are highly capable of generative
tasks like summarization [ 79] and data formalization [ 80], a
dedicated evaluation to assess the perceived utility, clarity, and
completeness of the tasks and summaries generated by DevNous
would be a valuable extension.
Finally, our work does not address non-functional requirements
such as security, privacy, and compliance. A production-ready
system would require protection against adversarial inputs and a
thorough analysis of data governance. However, our architecture
includes human-in-the-loop auditing and is extensible to allow
the definition of guardrails.
9 C onclusions
In this work, we introduced DevNous, an LLM-based multi-
agent system that addresses the critical gap between unstruc-
tured team dialogue and the structured artifacts required for IT
project governance. We have demonstrated that an autonomous
agent can successfully operate as an ambient actor within col-
laborative chat, interpreting and executing administrative tasks
with high efficacy. First, we present and validate an architec-
tural pattern that uses functional specialization to orchestrate
an LLM-based policy, achieving high procedural reliability for
unstructured-to-structured translation in chat-based communi-
cation. Second, we introduced an evaluation methodology for
this type of interactive agents. Our evaluation introduces a new
benchmark dataset of 160 human-simulated turns, generated
via an interactive SGA engaging in simulated dialogues with
DevNous, creating ecologically valid, path-dependent interac-
tions. These were manually annotated based on a multi-label
(Category, Action) tuple schema and the complete dataset is
publicly available.
Our experiments, show that DevNous, using functional spe-
cialization, category-action classification and workflow-aware
architecture, achieves an exact match turn Accuracy of 81.3%
and a multiset F1-Score of 0.845 on our dataset. These results
confirm the viability of our architecture and provide a robust
baseline for future research. The practical implication of this
work is a pathway to systems that effectively support decision-
making. By automating the high-overhead task of translating
dialogue into data, the agent ensures that project artifacts re-
main synchronized with the team’s conversational reality. This
allows teams to prioritize natural, fluid conversation, delegating
the cognitive load of administrative tracking and freeing human
expertise for strategic, value-driven work. Future directions
can expand beyond task execution to more sophisticated work-
flows, where agents assist not just in data formalization, but in
mission-aligned strategic and human-centric objectives.
