record_id: arxiv:2402.07456
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2402.07456
fetched_title: OS-C OPILOT : T OWARDS GENERALIST COMPUTER AGENTS WITH SELF -I MPROVEMENT
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T18:59:45Z

OS-Copilot: Towards Generalist Computer Agents with Self-Improvement
OS-C OPILOT : T OWARDS GENERALIST COMPUTER
AGENTS WITH SELF -I MPROVEMENT
Zhiyong Wu♢∗, Chengcheng Han♣∗ , Zichen Ding♣, Zhenmin Weng♣,
Zhoumianze Liu♢, Shunyu Yao♡, Tao Yu♠, Lingpeng Kong♠
♢Shanghai AI Laboratory♣East China Normal University
♡Princeton University♠The University of Hong Kong
wuzhiyong@pjlab.org.cn
https://os-copilot.github.io/
Figure 1: Running examples of FRIDAY when deployed on MacOS and tasked with (1) preparing
a focused working environment, (2) Calculating and drawing a chart in Excel, and (3) creating a
website for OS-Copilot. The text at the bottom illustrates the subtasks taken by FRIDAY. For each set
of examples, the figure at the top represents the initial OS state, while the one at the bottom depicts
the final state after execution. Boxes/Ovals highlight the changes made by FRIDAY.
ABSTRACT
Autonomous interaction with the computer has been a longstanding challenge with
great potential, and the recent proliferation of large language models (LLMs) has
markedly accelerated progress in building digital agents. However, most of these
agents are designed to interact with a narrow domain, such as a specific software
or website. This narrow focus constrains their applicability for general computer
tasks. To this end, we introduce OS-Copilot, a framework to build generalist
agents capable of interfacing with comprehensive elements in an operating system
(OS), including the web, code terminals, files, multimedia, and various third-party
applications. We use OS-Copilot to create FRIDAY, a self-improving embodied
agent for automating general computer tasks. On GAIA, a general AI assistants
benchmark, FRIDAY outperforms previous methods by 35%, showcasing strong
generalization to unseen applications via accumulated skills from previous tasks.
We also present numerical and quantitative evidence that FRIDAY learns to control
and self-improve on Excel and Powerpoint with minimal supervision. Our OS-
Copilot framework and empirical findings provide infrastructure and insights for
future research toward more capable and general-purpose computer agents.
∗ Equal Contribution.
1
arXiv:2402.07456v2 [cs.AI] 15 Feb 2024

OS-Copilot: Towards Generalist Computer Agents with Self-Improvement
1 I NTRODUCTION
From the 1920 novel R.U.R to characters like JARVIS inThe Iron Man, throughout the past century,
people have dreamed of building digital agents to automate daily work. However, current digital
agents, like Microsoft’s Cortana, are primarily tailored for simple tasks like setting the alarm yet
struggling with complex human requests. Fortunately, advancements in large language models
(LLMs) bring us closer to realizing the next generation of digital assistants.
Efforts in building language agents (integrating LLMs into digital agents) have focused primarily
on specific standalone applications, such as web browsers (Deng et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023),
command-line terminals (Yang et al., 2023a; Qiao et al., 2023), the Minecraft game (Wang et al.,
2023a), and database (Hu et al., 2023). In particular, there is a lack of exploration in developing
language agents that can effectively interact with the entire operating system. Developing OS-level
language agents presents a significant challenge due to the heterogeneity inherent in the OS ecosystem.
First, a unified interface is required for agents to seamlessly interact with the operating system, be it
through code, keyboard and mouse inputs, or APIs. Second, the vast array of distinct applications
poses significant challenges to the generalization and scalability of language agents. With hundreds
and thousands of applications in the OS, manually devising a nuanced control mechanism and
customized tools and prompts for each of them, is evidently impractical.
To tackle the first challenge, we introduce OS-Copilot, a framework aimed at accelerating the
construction of computer agents on Linux and MacOS by offering a universal interface for interaction.
This universal interface consolidates common practices for OS manipulation, including Python code
interpreter (Significant-Gravitas, 2023), bash terminal, mouse/keyboard control (Cheng et al., 2024),
and API calls (Qin et al., 2023). In Table 4, we present a broad spectrum of OS-Copilot’s example
use cases, empowered by these control methods.
In response to the second challenge, we then created FRIDAY ( Fully Responsive Intelligence,
Devoted to Assisting You) upon OS-Copilot.1 FRIDAY is a self-improving embodied agent seam-
lessly integrated into the OS to automate computer tasks. FRIDAY distinguishes itself from existing
general-purpose agents like AutoGPT (Significant-Gravitas, 2023) by featuring the ability to learn
to control unfamiliar applications through self-directed learning. All made possible with a self-
evolving configurator within FRIDAY . The configurator includes a self-directed learning module that
autonomously proposes a curriculum of tasks regarding an unfamiliar application. FRIDAY then
solves these tasks to learn to control this application by accumulating tools. In Figure 1, we provide
three case studies and demonstrate that with self-directed learning, FRIDAY successfully learns to
manipulate Excel and build a website using the frontend library React.
To systematically assess FRIDAY’s problem-solving capabilities within the OS, we evaluate its
performance on GAIA (Mialon et al., 2023b), a benchmark for general AI assistants. In the easiest
level-1 tasks, FRIDAY achieves a success rate of 40.86%, marking a 35% relative improvement over
the previous best system (30.3%), and significantly outperforming the popular AutoGPT-4 system
(14.4%). Even in the most challenging level-3 tasks, previously unsolvable by any other systems,
FRIDAY achieves a success rate of 6.12%. We further assess FRIDAY’s self-directed learning ability
on a spreadsheet manipulation dataset (Li et al., 2023), where initially FRIDAY fails to solve any
task. Surprisingly, following self-directed learning, FRIDAY achieves a success rate of 60%, even
surpassing a state-of-the-art model specifically designed for spreadsheet control.
We conclude the contributions of this paper as follows:
• OS-Copilot is a pioneering conceptual framework for building generalist computer agents
on Linux and MacOS, diverging from previous endeavors that often focus on individual
applications like web browsers. OS-Copilot provides a unified interface for app interactions
in the heterogeneous OS ecosystem. Furthermore, OS-Copilot can serve as a foundational
platform that supports future research in areas such as personalized digital assistants, multi-
modal agents, and agent learning in a situated environment.
• Leveraging OS-Copilot, we built FRIDAY, a self-improving AI assistant capable of solving
general computer tasks. FRIDAY demonstrates outstanding performance on a leading
benchmark and noteworthy generalization capabilities across unseen applications, attributed
1F.R.I.D.A.Y is also the name of an advanced AI Tony Stark used to replace JARVIS.
2

OS-Copilot: Towards Generalist Computer Agents with Self-Improvement
Figure 2: An overview of OS-Copilot framework.
to its innovative configurator. The evaluation results and case studies underscore the potential
of FRIDAY to serve as a helpful OS assistant.
2 T HE OS-C OPILOT FRAMEWORK
In this section, we first overview how OS-Copilot operates and then discuss its main components.
As shown in Figure 2, upon receiving a user request, a planner first constructs a plan that decomposes
the request into subtasks. Given a subtask, the configurator maintains a working memory that is
responsible for retrieving tools, knowledge, and any other relevant information needed for task
completion. Based on the information provided by the configurator, the actor will iteratively perform
operations of execution and criticism until the subtask is completed. In particular, the criticism
operation involves collecting execution feedback for self-correction and improvement. Researchers
and practitioners can readily tailor their own agents by implementing various designs on each
component. Our customization in FRIDAY is in §3.
2.1 P LANNER
The planner component will reason over user requests and decompose complex ones into simpler
subtasks. Most importantly, the planner needs to comprehend the agent’s capabilities to generate
plans at the correct granularity. To achieve this, it must retrieve relevant information about the agent’s
capabilities, such as in-house tools and operating system information, to assist planning. OS-Copilot
supports various planning methods, such as Plan-and-Solve (Wang et al., 2023c) and the directed
acyclic graph-based planner that we propose.
Directed acyclic graph-based planner. Existing planners, whether they generate linear structured
plans (Wang et al., 2023d) or non-linear ones (Besta et al., 2023), inherently necessitate agents
to execute tasks sequentially. Nevertheless, in practical scenarios, numerous independent tasks
can be parallelized to minimize execution time. For instance, a deep learning coding agent can
simultaneously monitor model training progress while generating inference code. To achieve the
aforementioned objective, we leverage LLMs to formalize the plan into a directed acyclic graph,
where each node represents a task and arrows represent the interdependencies between tasks. As an
illustration, we demonstrate how this planner works in § A, and provide the prompt in Table 5.
2.2 C ONFIGURATOR
The configurator component takes a subtask from the planner and configures it to help the actor
complete the subtask. Our design of the configurator is inspired by the biological nature of the human
brain, which has working, declarative, and procedural memory (Baddeley, 2003; Packard, 2009).
2.2.1 D ECLARATIVE MEMORY
Declarative or explicit memory is a subcategory of long-term memory and is used for storing facts
and events. Our declarative memory contains two following components:
3

OS-Copilot: Towards Generalist Computer Agents with Self-Improvement
User Profile. It records user’s preference regarding conversation style, tool-use habit, music/video
preference, etc. Accurate user profiling is critical for personalized problem-solving and recommenda-
tion. Although it has been widely studied in the recommendation area, personalized language agents
are rarely explored. The User Profile module is a conceptual design at the current stage due to the
lack of corresponding benchmarks.
Semantic Knowledge. It stores agents’ past trajectories or knowledge they acquired from the
Internet, users, and OS (e.g., system version and current working directory). This module is crucial
for agents to act correctly based on the current environment state and learn from past experiences.
2.2.2 P ROCEDURAL MEMORY
Procedural or implicit memory is another form of long-term memory mainly related to the skill
development ability of an individual. Once learned, procedural memories automatically do functions
that don’t involve our conscious involvement. In OS-Copilot, the procedural memory primarily
consists of a tool repository as the agent’s skill set.
Tool Repository Although LLMs can read and write, they do not process the ability to interact
with the operating system. As such, we need to equip agents with tools that translate natural language
into executable actions within the OS. The tool repository is where these tools are stored and updated.
We seed OS-Copilot with 4 manually created tools for basic computer functionalities, such as web
browsing and speech-to-text translation (see Appendix F for details of tools). In OS-Copilot, tools
can exist in two forms: either deployed as API services to be invoked using POST requests or stored
as a Python file (refer to Table 13 for an example).
2.2.3 W ORKING MEMORY
In contrast to declarative and procedural memory, working memory supports the short-term storage
and processing of information. It serves as the core of OS-Copilot’s design, connecting the planner,
configurator, and actor components. Working memory exchanges information with other modules via
internal (with long-term memory modules) and external (with the planner and actor) operations.
Internally, the working memory module is responsible for retrieving information from and updating
the long-term memory. This includes tasks such as retrieving available tools to aid in planning and
updating tool codes following self-correction.
Externally, the working memory module receives subtasks from the planner, adeptly gathers all
relevant information from declarative (e.g., current working directory) and procedural memory (e.g.,
tool documentation), and subsequently feeds this information into the actor component. The execution
feedback from the actor is then fed into the working memory for potential revisions.
2.3 A CTOR
The actor comprises two stages: execution and self-criticism. In the first stage, the executor proposes
an executable action (e.g., a bash command ”mkdir new folder”) based on the configuration prompt
and then executes the action in the operating system (through the Bash runtime environment in this
example). The critic module will then access the outcomes of the execution and formulate feedback
to refine execution errors and/or effect updates to the long-term memory.
Executor Given the configuration prompt, the executor completes the subtask by generating an
executable command or function call with correct parameters. The prompt of executor can be found
in Table 8. The proposed action will then be executed within the OS through the universal runtime
environment provided by OS-Copilot. To elaborate, OS-Copilot provides an interface that encapsu-
lates the Python runtime environment, bash runtime environment, API calls, and mouse/keyboard
control. These four control methods cover a broad spectrum of OS use cases, as shown in Table 4,
significantly facilitating the design of OS-level agents.
Critic Assessing the successful completion of a given subtask is challenging due to the absence of
ground truth. For further discussion regarding the challenge in the evaluation, readers are directed to
4

OS-Copilot: Towards Generalist Computer Agents with Self-Improvement
(a) Configurator
(b) A running example
Figure 3: The architecture of the configurator with (a) a typical working flow and (b) a concrete
running example.
Appendix D. To aid the Critic module in assessment, we gather comprehensive system information
before and after execution and employ LLMs to automatically evaluate the completion state.
In particular, following each subtask execution, the Critic evaluates the following aspects (see Table 9
for the prompt): (1) Determining whether the current sub-task is completed through the analysis
of execution results and the environmental state. (2) In the event of failed completion, offering a
comprehensive error analysis and providing suggestions for correction of tools or actions (how tools
are called). (3) Assessing the necessity for restructuring subtasks, including the addition of new
subtasks or modifications to the content and dependencies of existing subtasks.
3 T HE FRIDAY A GENT
The design principle of FRIDAY aims to maximize generality by equipping the agent with the ability
for self-refinement and self-directed learning. We first use an example to illustrate how FRIDAY
operates and emphasize its capacity for self-refinement. Subsequently, we delve into how FRIDAY
acquires the proficiency to control unfamiliar applications through self-directed learning.
3.1 A RUNNING EXAMPLE
In Figure 3, we use a running example to demonstrate how FRIDAY functions within the OS.
Upon receiving the subtask “Change the system into the Dark mode” (step 1⃝), the Configuration
Tracker employs dense retrieval to recall relevant information from the long-term memory to construct
a prompt (step 2⃝). This prompt encompasses related tools, user profiles, OS system versions, and
the agent’s working directory.
In this example, no suitable tools are identified (similarities below a specified threshold), prompting
activation of the Tool Generator to devise an application-tailored tool for the current subtask (step 3⃝).
As we can see from Figure 3(b), the generated tool manifests as a Python class utilizing AppleScript
to change systems to dark mode.
Subsequently, with the tool created and the configuration prompt finalized, the Executor processes
the prompt, generates an executable action, and executes it (step 4⃝). As shown in the bottom of
Figure 3(b), the executor first stores the tool code into a Python file and then executes the code in the
command-line terminal.
After execution, the critic evaluates whether the subtask is successfully completed (step 5⃝). Upon
success, the critic assigns a score (using LLMs) ranging from 0 to 10 to the generated tool, with a
higher score indicating greater potential for future reuse. In the current implementation, tools scoring
above 8 are preserved by updating the tool repository in procedural memory (step 7⃝).
However, in the event of a failed execution, the refiner collects feedback from the critic and initiates
self-correction (step 6⃝) of the responsible action, tool, or subtask (see Table 7 for the prompt). The
FRIDAY will iterate through steps 4⃝ to 6⃝ until the subtask is considered completed or a maximum
of three attempts is reached.
5

OS-Copilot: Towards Generalist Computer Agents with Self-Improvement
3.2 S ELF -DIRECTED LEARNING
Self-directed learning is a crucial ability for humans to acquire information and learn new
skills (Knowles, 1975), and it has demonstrated promising results in embodied agents within Minecraft
games (Wang et al., 2023a).
With a pre-defined learning objective, such as mastering spreadsheet manipulation, FRIDAY is
prompted to propose a continuous stream of tasks related to the objective, spanning from easy to
challenging. FRIDAY then follows this curriculum, resolving these tasks through trial and error,
thereby accumulating valuable tools and semantic knowledge throughout the process. We provide
more details in learning in § 4.2. Despite its simple design, our evaluation results indicate that
self-directed learning is crucial for a general-purpose OS-level agent.
4 E XPERIMENTS
We evaluate FRIDAY on GAIA (Mialon et al., 2023b), a benchmark for general AI assistants featuring
466 challenging question-answering tasks. To answer questions in GAIA, computer agents need skills
to calculate numbers, browse the web, process video and speech signal, and manipulate files, etc.
Settings. We initialize FRIDAY with four basic tools and facilitate its exploration of the dev set of
GAIA to accumulate more tools (result in 9 more tools). For a complete list of the basic tools and the
tools generated by FRIDAY in the development set, please refer to Appendix F.1. Subsequently, we
evaluated FRIDAY’s performance on the test set by submitting our results to the official evaluation
server2. Due to the limited budget, we use GPT4-turbo-1106 in FRIDAY.
Baselines. We reports results of GPT-4 with and without manually set plugins, as well as AutoGPT
with GPT4 as the backend (AutoGPT-4). GPT-4 Plugins rely on humans to browse and select proper
plugins based on the task question. As a reference, we also include human performance sourced from
Mialon et al. (2023b). We conduct a further ablation study on self-directed learning with FRIDAY
(w/o learning) by disabling FRIDAY’s learning on the development set.
4.1 M AIN RESULTS
Level Level 1 Level 2 Level 3
Human* 93.90 91.80 87.30
GPT-4 9.68 1.89 0
GPT-4-Turbo 9.68 6.92 0
AutoGPT-4 15.05 0.63 0
GPT-4 Plugins 30.30 9.70 0
FRIDAY w/o learning 36.56 17.61 6.12
FRIDAY 40.86 20.13 6.12
Table 1: Evaluation Results. All results are reported on
the private test set, except for the Human score, which is
averaged across the dev and test sets.
From Table 1, FRIDAY demonstrates
an impressive 40.86% success rate
in level-1 tasks, a 35% relative im-
provement over the state-of-the-art.
The improvement is even more ev-
ident in level-2 tasks. Even when
confronted with the most challeng-
ing level-3 tasks, where none of the
preceding baselines achieve success,
FRIDAY correctly solves 6.12% prob-
lems.
Root of improvement. To discern
the root of FRIDAY’s effectiveness,
we need to exam baselines more
closely. AutoGPT-4 shares similari-
ties with FRIDAY in that it also has a
memory module and tool repository, and process the ability to decompose tasks. The discrepancy
between FRIDAY and AutoGPT-4 underscores the importance of self-criticism and refinement. GPT-
4 Plugins outperforms AutoGPT-4 significantly, and we hypothesize that this is due to its access to
an extensive tool library. Finally, FRIDAY’s superiority over GPT-4 Plugins further validates that
while the ability to utilize tools and access to a broad tool set is crucial for the success of general
agents, the planner, critic, and refiner are what elevate them to the next level. Although none of these
2https://huggingface.co/spaces/gaia-benchmark/leaderboard
6

OS-Copilot: Towards Generalist Computer Agents with Self-Improvement
components are first innovated in this paper, OS-Copilot organically combines them into a cohesive
whole and demonstrates the effectiveness of this architecture through strong evaluation results. This
serves as a valuable design guideline for future general computer agents.
By comparing FRIDAY against FRIDAY (w/o learning), we aim to isolate the contribution of self-
directed learning to the final performance. As we can see, even without self-directed learning,
FRIDAY still significantly outperforms all baselines, further highlighting the effectiveness of the
framework and our custom design. The gain of self-directed learning underscores that conventional
approaches reliant on a pre-defined tool set encounter challenges in open environments like GAIA,
emphasizing the pivotal role of FRIDAY’s capacity to autonomously devise and employ tools in its
notable success.
Extended Evaluation and Analysis. We provide an extended evaluation regarding FRIDAY’s time
efficiency and a breakdown of its capability per domain in Appendix B.
4.2 S ELF -DIRECTED LEARNING
We perform quantitative and qualitative evaluations to analyze FRIDAY’s self-directed learning
capability.
Agents Models Pass@1
SheetCopilot†
GPT-3.5-Turbo 40%
Claude 45%
GPT-4 55%
FRIDAY (w/o learning) GPT-4 0%
FRIDAY GPT-4 60%
Table 2: Comparison of different agents on the
SheetCopilot-20 dataset. Pass@1 refers to the pass
rate with each task being performed only once (Chen
et al., 2021).† denotes the results reported in (Li et al.,
2023). We highlight the best results in bold.
Quantitative Analysis To showcase FRI-
DAY’s ability to master unfamiliar ap-
plications through self-learning, we con-
duct experiments on the SheetCopilot-203
dataset (Li et al., 2023). This dataset in-
cludes 20 spreadsheet control tasks, cov-
ering various operations such as Format-
ting, Management, Charts, Pivot Tables,
and Formulas, representing typical use
cases of spreadsheets. FRIDAY is self-
instructed (Wang et al., 2022) to gener-
ate 10 tasks about manipulating Excel us-
ing the propenyxl package. FRIDAY then
solves these 10 tasks and autonomously
accumulates 8 tools, including operations
such as counting elements and deleting
sheets by name (see Appendix F.2 for a complete tool list).
The experimental results are summarized in Table 2. Initially, FRIDAY, without self-directed learning,
is unable to complete any tasks and tends to use the pandas and matplotlib packages for spreadsheet
control, resulting in failures. When equipped with self-directed learning, FRIDAY’s performance
surpasses that of SheetCopilot (Li et al., 2023), an agent specifically designed for spreadsheet tasks.
Notably, all the atomic operations and tools in SheetCopilot are manually crafted and verified, whereas
FRIDAY autonomously generates all tools used. Also worth noting that FRIDAY achieves such a
level of proficiency by solving and learning on just 10 tasks. This outcome signals a promising future
where we can build general-purpose OS-level agents that can efficiently scale to support various
applications without human intervention.
Qualitative Analysis In our qualitative analysis, we design a task to create a PowerPoint slide
to introduce OS-Copilot. The specific content, font, font size, and other details required for the
slide are elaborately described in the task instruction, as detailed in Appendix G. The experimental
results, as shown in Figure 4(a), demonstrate that without self-directed learning, FRIDAY struggles to
effectively control font types, sizes, and the positioning and sizing of inserted images. Nevertheless,
following a period of self-directed learning, FRIDAY acquires various text box configuration tools,
such as changing the text color, adjusting the font size of slide text, and modifying the line spacing
of body text in PowerPoint presentations, as illustrated in Figure 4(b). Further exploration leads
FRIDAY to learn how to adjust the size and position of inserted images, ultimately successfully
3The SheetCopilot dataset comprises 221 spreadsheet control tasks. Li et al. (2023) select 20 representative
tasks from this set for extensive evaluation.
7

OS-Copilot: Towards Generalist Computer Agents with Self-Improvement
(a) FRIDAY w/o learning
(b) Learn to control text boxes
(c) Learn to insert and position im-
ages
Figure 4: The illustration of FRIDAY executing the task of constructing a PowerPoint slide.
completing the task, as depicted in Figure 4(c). A complete list of tools acquired by FRIDAY can
be found in Appendix F.3. The demonstrated learning process compellingly establishes FRIDAY’s
proficiency in mastering unfamiliar applications through self-directed learning.
5 R ELATED WORK
Autonomous agent powered by LLMs (Weng, 2023), or language agents (Sumers et al., 2023), is a
fast-growing research field that has attracted lots of attention recently (Wang et al., 2023b).
Language agents have been designed and applied in various domains, including robotics (Driess et al.,
2023; Brohan et al., 2023), web manipulation (Yao et al., 2022a; Zhou et al., 2023), and games (Fan
et al., 2022). It is worth noting that the majority of these digital language agents are tailored to specific
scenarios, such as web manipulation tasks (Deng et al., 2023), interactive command-line coding (Yang
et al., 2023a), automating spreadsheet control (Li et al., 2023), playing Minecraft (Wang et al., 2023a),
and facilitating automated data analysis (Zhang et al., 2023). The open-source community continues
to push the boundaries by introducing frameworks that address multiple scenarios within a single
platform. Notable projects in this domain include AutoGPT 4 and OpenAgents (Xie et al., 2023). But
still, these language agents currently operate within the confines of either a terminal or a web browser
and can hardly interact with other applications.
Language agents represent a complex system composed of a lengthy pipeline comprising various
components, each representing a substantial body of research. For a comprehensive discussion on
the methodology, we direct readers to recent surveys (Wang et al., 2023b; Mialon et al., 2023a). In
this paragraph, we provide a brief overview of some related components. During the planning stage,
researchers propose to decompose complex tasks into a sequential series of simpler subtasks (Yao
et al., 2022b; Xu et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023c). Notably, recent advancements in this area include
allowing LLMs to consider multiple reasoning paths (Sun et al., 2023), self-evaluation of choices to
determine the subsequent course of action, and even backtracking when necessary to make global
decisions (Yao et al., 2023; Besta et al., 2023). The memory module is also a common design in
language agents. It can be categorized into short-term memory facilitated by in-context learning (Wu
et al., 2022; 2023), as well as long-term memory associated with information retrieval and lifelong
learning (Wang et al., 2023a). The execution module grounds the output of LLMs into executable
actions and executes them in the embodied environment (Schick et al., 2023; Cai et al., 2023). Finally,
the reflection module processes the environmental state after execution and gathers feedback to rectify
potential errors that may have occurred in the aforementioned two modules (Shinn et al., 2023).
6 C ONCLUSION
In this paper, we present OS-Copilot, a framework designed for OS-level language agents. Leveraging
OS-Copilot, we developed FRIDAY , an embodied computer agent. FRIDAY exhibits remarkable per-
formance in solving open-environment computer tasks, and demonstrating its capability to effectively
learn and control previously unseen applications by self-directed learning. More discussion about
limitations and future work can be found in Appendix D.
4https://github.com/Significant-Gravitas/AutoGPT
8

OS-Copilot: Towards Generalist Computer Agents with Self-Improvement
