record_id: arxiv:2310.09233
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2310.09233
fetched_title: AgentCF: Collaborative Learning with Autonomous Language Agents for Recommender Systems
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:09:09Z

AgentCF: Collaborative Learning with Autonomous Language
Agents for Recommender Systems
Junjie Zhang1, Yupeng Hou2, Ruobing Xie3, Wenqi Sun1, Julian McAuley2, Wayne Xin Zhao1,B,
Leyu Lin3, and Ji-Rong Wen1
junjie.zhang@ruc.edu.cn,batmanfly@gmail.com
1Gaoling School of Artificial Intelligence, Renmin University of China
2UC San Diego
3WeChat, Tencent
ABSTRACT
Recently, there has been an emergence of employing LLM-powered
agents as believable human proxies, based on their remarkable
decision-making capability. However, existing studies mainly focus
on simulating human dialogue. Human non-verbal behaviors, such
as item clicking in recommender systems, although implicitly ex-
hibiting user preferences and could enhance the modeling of users,
have not been deeply explored. The main reasons lie in the gap
between language modeling and behavior modeling, as well as the
incomprehension of LLMs about user-item relations.
To address this issue, we propose AgentCF for simulating user-
item interactions in recommender systems through agent-based
collaborative filtering. We creatively consider not only users but
also items as agents, and develop a collaborative learning approach
that optimizes both kinds of agents together. Specifically, at each
time step, we first prompt the user and item agents to interact au-
tonomously. Then, based on the disparities between the agents’
decisions and real-world interaction records, user and item agents
are prompted to reflect on and adjust the misleading simulations
collaboratively, thereby modeling their two-sided relations. The op-
timized agents can also propagate their preferences to other agents
in subsequent interactions, implicitly capturing the collaborative fil-
tering idea. Overall, the optimized agents exhibit diverse interaction
behaviors within our framework, including user-item, user-user,
item-item, and collective interactions. The results show that these
agents can demonstrate personalized behaviors akin to those of real-
world individuals, sparking the development of next-generation
user behavior simulation.
CCS CONCEPTS
• Information systems→ Recommender systems.
KEYWORDS
Agents, Large Language Models, Collaborative Learning
B Corresponding author.
Permission to make digital or hard copies of all or part of this work for personal or
classroom use is granted without fee provided that copies are not made or distributed
for profit or commercial advantage and that copies bear this notice and the full citation
on the first page. Copyrights for components of this work owned by others than ACM
must be honored. Abstracting with credit is permitted. To copy otherwise, or republish,
to post on servers or to redistribute to lists, requires prior specific permission and/or a
fee. Request permissions from permissions@acm.org.
Conference acronym ’XX, August 03–05, 2022, Woodstock, NY
© 2022 Association for Computing Machinery.
ACM ISBN 978-1-4503-XXXX-X/18/06. . . $15.00
https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
ACM Reference Format:
Junjie Zhang, Yupeng Hou, Ruobing Xie, Wenqi Sun, Julian McAuley, Wayne
Xin Zhao, Leyu Lin and Ji-Rong Wen. 2022. AgentCF: Collaborative Learn-
ing with Autonomous Language Agents for Recommender Systems. In
Proceedings of Make sure to enter the correct conference title from your rights
confirmation email (Conference acronym ’XX). ACM, New York, NY, USA,
16 pages. https://doi.org/XXXXXXX.XXXXXXX
1 INTRODUCTION
With the recent advancements in large language models (LLMs),
LLM-powered agents demonstrate impressive capabilities in au-
tonomous interaction and decision making [25, 32, 45, 61]. By scal-
ing their numbers, these agents exhibit the emergence of human-
like behaviors at both the individual and population levels [ 12,
39]. This observation highlights the potential of employing LLM-
powered agents to simulate human social behaviors, such as daily
lives in Smallville [39] and software development [40].
Typically, existing studies primarily focus on simulating human
dialogue using semantic knowledge of LLMs. However, in addition
to dialogue, real-world human behaviors also involve non-verbal
aspects like user-item interactions in recommender systems, which
implicitly reflect user preferences and have the potential to facili-
tate personalized user modeling. To simulate such behaviors, some
work verbalizes these interaction records into natural language text
to prompt LLMs [45, 48]. Nevertheless, we argue that this method
struggles to capture the underlying behavioral patterns of these
interactions, due to the gap between universal language model-
ing and personalized behavior modeling. For example, shoppers
who buy diapers on Friday also tend to buy beer [37]. This behav-
ioral pattern can be effectively captured by collaborative filtering
models [16, 41], but confuse LLMs as the two items are semanti-
cally unrelated. Therefore, it is crucial to develop methods to better
characterize human behaviors in LLM-powered simulations.
Focused on this research topic, in this work, we take recom-
mender systems, a common web application, as the testbed to study
the simulation of user-item interactions with LLM-power agents.
Typically, in addition to directly prompting LLMs based on user his-
torical interactions [9, 46], there are also some studies that employ
agents to perform recommendations, by introducing specialized
tools and planning strategies [20, 50]. Especially, RecAgent [48] de-
velops an LLM-based simulator, regarding users as agents. However,
these studies mainly focus on characterizing user-side behaviors
using universal LLMs, neglecting the effect of item-side modeling in
this two-sided interaction process. In recommender systems, users
arXiv:2310.09233v1 [cs.IR] 13 Oct 2023

Conference acronym ’XX, August 03–05, 2022, Woodstock, NY Zhang, et al.
possess personalized preferences for items, while items have poten-
tial adopters. Modeling the two-sided relations between users and
items is crucial for enhancing personalized recommendations [16].
Considering these issues, our solution is inspired by the collab-
orative learning idea from previous recommendation models (e.g.,
BPR [41] and NCF [ 16]). In these methods, users and items are
modeled as equally important parts and the recommender is essen-
tially a preference function that measures user-item affinity based
on the two sides. During the optimization process, the parameters
related to users and items are collaboratively optimized, making
the recommender better fit interaction records. Therefore, to facil-
itate the comprehension of user-item relations by LLM-powered
agents, our idea is to simulate both user agents and item agents,
and mimic the optimization process of traditional recommenders.
The merits of such a method are twofold. Firstly, it can model the
user-item interaction by autonomous interaction between user and
item agents, instead of verbalizing the interaction as plain text [48].
Secondly, it enables mutual optimization of user and item agents
to capture their two-sided relations, rather than simulating user
behaviors individually. We are also aware of several studies, such
as Reflexion [43] and Self-Refine [34], optimize general-purpose
agents for better decision-making in downstream tasks. However,
these methods are task-focused or user-focused, optimizing agents
through their own exploration, which is essentially self-learning
rather than collaborative learning emphasized in our approach.
To this end, we propose the agent-based collaborative filtering
approach, named AgentCF. Unlike previous studies that mainly
focus on user simulation, our approach considers not only users
but also items as agents. Both kinds of agents are equipped with
memory modules, maintaining the simulated preferences and tastes
of potential adopters. This involves their intrinsic features as well
as acquired behavioral information. As the key of our approach, we
collaboratively optimize the user agents and item agents, leveraging
the remarkable decision-making and reflection abilities of LLMs. At
each step, we prompt user and item agents to autonomously interact,
thereby exploring whether these simulated agents can make con-
sistent decisions with real-world interaction records. Then, based
on the feedback obtained from these interactions, we design a col-
laborative reflection mechanism that enables user agents and item
agents to reflect on and adjust their memory in a mutual manner. In
this way, the simulated preferences of user agents and item agents
mutually aggregate, and can be propagated to other agents in sub-
sequent interactions. Thus, it implicitly models the collaborative
filtering idea through interactions.
We evaluate our proposed approach through extensive exper-
iments on real-world datasets. Results show that our approach
effectively simulates user-item interactions, achieving promising
performance on recommendation tasks compared to several classi-
cal recommendation models and LLM-based recommenders. More-
over, within our framework, user and item agents engage in free
communication, creating various types of interactions (user-user,
item-item, and collective), wherein they exhibit personalized be-
haviors similar to those of real-world individuals. The results also
spark the development of next-generation user behavior simulation.
The main contributions of this work are as follows:
• We consider both users and items as agents, and develop a user-
item interaction simulation approach for recommender systems,
emphasizing the modeling of two-sided interaction relations.
• We collaboratively optimize the user and item agents, design
a collaborative reflection mechanism, and employ it to achieve
mutual update of user and item memory.
• Extensive experiments demonstrate the effectiveness of our
approach in simulating personalized interactions.
2 METHODOLOGY
In this section, we present the proposed agent-based collaborative
filtering approach, named AgentCF. Our approach enables user
agents and item agents to collaboratively learn from user-item
interactions in recommender systems. The overall framework of
our proposed AgentCF is depicted in Figure 1.
2.1 Preliminaries
To ease the understanding of our approach, we first describe the
traditional recommendation setting, and then introduce our task
setting and the overview of our approach.
Traditional Recommendation Setting. In a recommender sys-
tem, there exists a set of usersU ={𝑢}, a set of itemsI ={𝑖}, and a
set of their interaction records (often grouped by users in chronolog-
ical order), denoted byD ={⟨𝑢, 𝑖⟩}. To conduct recommendation, a
preference function 𝑓(𝑢, 𝑖) is built to capture the preference degree
of user𝑢 over item𝑖, where an interacted item (i.e., positive item, de-
noted by 𝑖+) would receive a higher score than an item that the user
does not interact with (i.e., negative item, denoted by 𝑖−). For ex-
ample, BPR [41] builds a personalized pairwise ranking model that
compares the preference over two candidate items, and NCF [16]
employs neural networks to fit user-item interaction relationship.
Subsequently, the learning of preference function 𝑓(𝑢, 𝑖) can be
converted into a standard gradient-based function fitting problem
based on training dataD ={⟨𝑢, 𝑖⟩} in machine learning [3].
Our Task Setting. In this work, we follow the traditional recom-
mendation setting above and incorporate LLM-powered agents into
recommender systems. Different from prior studies [39, 48] only
considering task or user agents, item agents are also included in
our work and will be a crucial part of developing our approach.
Notably, we slightly reuse the notations, and use𝑢 and 𝑖 to denote a
user agent and an item agent, respectively. Specifically, a user agent
𝑢 is expected to capture the preference of the corresponding real
user, and an item agent 𝑖 is expected to reflect the corresponding
item characteristics and potential adopters’ preferences. Following
such a setting, the original user-item interaction will be simulated
by autonomous interaction between the user and item agents. In
our work, we consider a ranking task that ranks a candidate list
{𝑐1,··· , 𝑐𝑛} for a user agent𝑢 based on LLMs:𝑓LLM(𝑢,{𝑐1,··· , 𝑐𝑛}).
Different from traditional recommendation models, the LLM that
implements 𝑓LLM(·) will be fixed during the optimization process.
Overview of AgentCF . To implement the agents, the memory
mechanism (i.e., storing the past states, actions, and contexts [47])
and the reflection mechanism ( i.e., revising the agents’ states or
recognitions [38, 43]) have been widely explored in various task
scenarios. However, existing work often employs a task-focused

AgentCF: Collaborative Learning with Autonomous Language Agents for Recommender Systems Conference acronym ’XX, August 03–05, 2022, Woodstock, NY
Previous Memory
Autonomous Interaction
Reflection & Memory Update
•User Agent Memory:I adore energetic guitar-driven rock, and dance pop music…
•SystemPrompt: The first CD is [Memory], the second CD is [Memory]. Please
select your preferred CD from these two candidates and provide an explanation.
•User Agent Response: I prefer ‘The V ery Best of Prince’… This CD resonates with
my preference for Pop and Dance Pop CDs…
•SystemPrompt: Youfind that you don’t like the CD that you chose, indicating your
preferences have changed. Please update your preferences.
•SystemPrompt: The user finds that hemakes a unsuitable choice, possibly due to the
misleading information in CDs’ features. Please update the description.
•Pos Item Agent Memory:The CD ‘Highway to Hell’ is classic rock and AOR,
radiating raw energy and infectious melodies that captivate fans of classic rock…
•Neg Item Agent Memory:‘The V ery Best of Prince’ is a Pop and Dance Pop CD,
offering a collection of prince’s greatest hits for an enjoyable experience…
•User Agent Response:I adore energetic guitar-driven rock, classic rock, and AOR. I
value classic rock for its raw energy and infectious melodies. I do not like Pop…
•Pos Item AgentResponse: ‘Highway to Hell’ is classic rock and AOR CD, exuding a
raw energy and infectious melodies, ideal for energetic guitar-driven enthusiasts…
AgentCF
🤖
🤖
Autonomous
Interac-on
Collabora-ve
Reﬂec-on
Language
Feedback
𝑀!! 𝑀!"
Preference
Propaga-on
BoughtReal World:
❤
Tradi-onalRecommender
Grad. basedOp-miza-on
🤔
𝑀"
Pull
Push
✖
❤
✖
Figure 1: The overall framework of AgentCF and a case about the optimization process of agents: (1) The user and item agents
are first prompted to autonomously interact. (2) These agents adjust the misconceptions in their memory, by reflecting on the
disparities between their decisions and real-world interactions. In this process, the simulated preferences of user and item
agents aggregate (as indicated by the highlighted content) and can propagate to other agents in subsequent interactions.
(e.g., ReAct [57]) or user-oriented simulation approach (e.g., RecA-
gent [48]), and the objects (e.g., the items in recommender systems)
involved in this process are not explicitly considered. Since the
recommendation task essentially needs to model the two-sided
interaction relation between users and items, we argue that item
agents are important to simulate the real interaction scenario in
recommender systems. Without incorporating item agents, it is dif-
ficult to explicitly model the essential idea “like alike” (i.e., like the
items that are adopted by similar users) in collaborative filtering [4].
Notably, our approach has two technical contributions in adapting
autonomous language agents for recommender systems:
• Collaborative memory-based optimization . Instead of simply
prompting LLMs with user’s historical interactions [9, 33] , we aim
to refine (without gradient update) both the simulated user and item
agents through their mutual interactions. At each time step, these
agents are prompted to conduct autonomous interactions, and then
collaboratively reflect on the disparities between their decisions
and real-world interaction records. In this way, the simulated user
and item agents can accordingly adjust or update their memories,
enabling them to better fit the real-world interaction behaviors.
• Implicit preference propogation. Different from prior studies [40,
48], a notable feature of our approach is that we update the memory
of both users and item agents for each interaction record. This
enables the item memory to be injected into the preferences of users
who interact with it. When new interactions occur, subsequent users
will be also informed about the preference of previous adopters of
this item. The same process can also be applied to the user side. In
this case, our approach essentially models the collaborative filtering
idea by propagating preferences from user-item interactions.
2.2 Collaborative Agent Optimization
In this part, we present the collaborative optimization process that
is developed based on both user and item agents, and discuss how
it relates to the classic collaborative filtering approach.
2.2.1 Memory Design. To specialize the LLM-powered agents for
recommender systems, different from prior studies [ 39, 48], we
equip both user and item agents with memory modules, maintaining
their intrinsic features and collaborative information.
User Memory. For user agents, the memory module aims to store
various kinds of useful information that reflects the user preferences.
Since real-world user preferences often change dynamically, we
equip each user agent𝑢 with short-term memory 𝑀𝑠𝑢 and long-term
memory 𝑀𝑙𝑢. Especially, short-term memory is a natural language
text that describes the recently updated preference of the user
agent, which can be initialized with their general preferences like “I
enjoy listening to CDs”. Furthermore, long-term memory is a pool of
historical preference texts that can store the evolving process of user
preference. When engaged in a new interaction, user agents can
directly access their short-term memory, while retrieving relevant
information from their long-term memory.
Item Memory. For item agents, we equip them with adjustable
memory modules to record information about their own character-
istics as well as the preferences of their adopters,e.g., a rock CD may
be ideal for energetic guitar-driven enthusiasts. However, unlike
user memory, we only equip each item agent 𝑖 with a unified mem-
ory module 𝑀𝑖, since item information is relatively stable through
time. Item memory can be initialized by their identity information,

Conference acronym ’XX, August 03–05, 2022, Woodstock, NY Zhang, et al.
such as titles and categories, and will be continuously updated with
user preferences when making new interactions. This process can
largely complete the global characteristics of an item in real-world
systems and enable the propagation of preference information,
which is the key to collaborative learning in our approach.
2.2.2 Autonomous Interactions for Contrastive Item Selection. Given
the initialized agents, our task is to optimize these agents and enable
them to simulate real-world user-item interactions. To achieve this,
we first explore the behavior alignment between these simulated
agents and real-world individuals, so as to provide feedback for
updating these agents. This involves testing whether the agents
can make consistent decisions with real-world interaction records
when selecting candidates. We can also consider this process as the
“forward computation” of the recommender models (e.g., BPR [41])
when comparing the preference over two items by a user.
Specifically, we employ the real user behavioral sequences (ar-
ranged in chronological order) as “training data”. At each step of
these interactions, we present a contrastive pair of both a positive
item 𝑖+ and a negative item 𝑖− as candidates for user agents to
select from. Intuitively, agents lacking personalization mainly rely
on commonsense knowledge to select popular candidates and those
positioned higher in the display list for interaction. To increase the
discrimination difficulty, we deliberately introduce popular bias
and position bias in candidate selection: we sample a negative item
with high popularity in the dataset and then place it before the pos-
itive item in the selection list. Then, the user agent 𝑢 is tasked with
selecting an item𝑖𝑜 from the candidates and providing explanations
𝑦𝑒𝑥𝑝 for this choice, by collaboratively considering the preference
from its memory and the features from the memories of candidates:
𝑖𝑜 = 𝑓LLM(𝑀𝑢 ; 𝑀𝑖− ; 𝑀𝑖+) (1)
𝑦exp = PromptLLM(𝑖𝑜 ; 𝑀𝑢 ; 𝑀𝑖− ; 𝑀𝑖+) (2)
2.2.3 Collaborative Reflection and Memory Update. The above pro-
cess has enabled agents to simulate the interaction behaviors. Next,
we derive the feedback signal by comparing the agents’ decisions
with real-world interaction data, and employ it to collaboratively
optimize the involved user agent and item agents, serving as the
“backward update” part of traditional recommenders. Since LLMs
are fixed in this work, there is no explicit gradient-based learn-
ing process as in traditional recommender models [41]. Thus, we
mainly update the associated memories of user and item agents.
Based on the agent’s decision 𝑖𝑜 and explanation 𝑦exp generated
above, we prompt both user and item agents to reflect on and adjust
the misconceptions in their simulated preferences and features. We
refer to this process as collaborative reflection, as it emphasizes the
collaborative learning of the user-item relations, by performing
reflection based on both user and item memories. It is different
from task-specific reflection ( e.g., ReAct [57]) and user-oriented
reflection (e.g., RecAgent [48]), which construct the self-reflection
only from the perspective of the task solver or user. Specifically,
if a user agent makes the right choice that aligns with the real
behavior, we inform it about the correctness and store the related
interaction information in its memory. For an incorrect choice,
we introduce the following collaborative reflection mechanism to
revise agents’ memories and behaviors accordingly, enabling user
agents to simulate real interaction behaviors and the involved item
agents to align with the adopter’s preferences:
𝑀𝑠
𝑢
′← Reflection𝑢(𝑖𝑜 ; 𝑦exp; 𝑀𝑢 ; 𝑀𝑖− ; 𝑀𝑖+), (3)
𝑀′
𝑖← Reflection𝑖(𝑖𝑜 ; 𝑦exp; 𝑀𝑢 ; 𝑀𝑖− ; 𝑀𝑖+) (4)
𝑀𝑙
𝑢
′
← Append(𝑀𝑙
𝑢 ; 𝑀𝑠
𝑢), (5)
where 𝑀𝑠𝑢
′ denote the reflected short-term memory of user 𝑢 and
𝑀′
𝑖 denote the reflected memory of item 𝑖. 𝑀𝑙𝑢
′ is the updated
long-term memory of user 𝑢, which appends the user’s previous
short-term memory and can be retrieved when making a new inter-
action. Note that we do not modify the memory of the negative item
agent, because we find that LLMs tend to over-complain the nega-
tive item agent’s drawbacks, disregarding the fact that it may also
be attractive for other users. From Equation (3) and (4) (a similar
prompting method in Equation (2)), we can see that the reflection
is actually derived based on the memories of user agent 𝑢, positive
item agent 𝑖+, and negative item agent 𝑖−. Therefore, such a reflec-
tion mechanism enables user and item agents to better understand
their two-sided interaction relations by effectively discriminating
between positive instances and negative instances.
At each step of interaction ( i.e., optimization), we iterate the
selection process (Section 2.2.2) and the collaborative reflection
process (Section 2.2.3) until user agents make choices consistent
with those of real users or reach the maximum round of iterations.
In essence, throughout the collaborative optimization process, the
simulated user and item agents follow the decision-making process
of real-world individuals, progressing step by step. This makes user
agents become more personalized and item agents aggregate the
preferences of adopters by learning from interactions, improving
the simulation of user-item interactions. The implementation details
and prompts are presented in Appendix B and C.
2.2.4 Connection with Classical Recommendation Models. In the
field of recommender systems, various models such as BPR [41] and
NCF [16] are developed. In general, these models set parameters
(typically hidden embeddings) to represent user preferences and
item characteristics, and optimize them to fit user-item interaction
records through two stages, namely forward preference evaluation
(estimating preference score) and backward parameter update (per-
forming gradient update). In this way, users or items that display
similar interaction behaviors can have similar representations in
parameter space, thus capturing the collaborative filtering idea.
Our approach mimics the optimization process of traditional
recommenders. The user and item memories can be considered
as their language-based parameters ( i.e., embeddings). The item
selection process (Section 2.2.2) and collaborative reflection process
(Section 2.2.3) correspond to the forward and backward stages in
recommendation models. In our approach, explicit gradient opti-
mization is not employed. Instead, the collaborative reflection plays
a similar role of “semantic gradient”, steering how user and item
agents adjust themselves. Moreover, based on the collaborative re-
flection, the user and item agents mutually interact and aggregate
each other’s preference information, which is then propagated to
new agents in subsequent interactions. Therefore, by establishing
preference propagation from interactions of user and item agents,
our approach incorporates the idea of collaborative filtering.

AgentCF: Collaborative Learning with Autonomous Language Agents for Recommender Systems Conference acronym ’XX, August 03–05, 2022, Woodstock, NY
2.3 Agent Interaction Inference
After the above memory-based optimization, our approach can
simulate highly personalized user agents and preference-aware item
agents. In this part, we further study how to employ these simulated
agents to infer the potential user-item interactions, focusing on the
ranking task for a list of candidates{𝑐1,··· , 𝑐𝑛}.
Basic Prompting Strategy. Since both user and item agents are
collaboratively optimized to model their two-sided relations, as the
basic prompting form, we directly prompt the LLM with the agents’
simulated user preferences and the candidate item features. This
enables the LLM to serve as a collaborative recommender:
RB = 𝑓LLM(𝑀𝑠
𝑢 ;{𝑀𝑐1,··· , 𝑀 𝑐𝑛}) (6)
where 𝑀𝑠𝑢 is the short-term memory of user agent𝑢,{𝑀𝑐1,··· , 𝑀𝑐𝑛}
are the corresponding memories of the candidate item agents, 𝑛 is
the number of candidates, andR is the ranking result.
Advanced Prompting Strategies. Although short-term memory
describes the current preference of a user agent, retrieving their
specialized preferences from long-term memory toward candidates
can allow them to make more personalized inferences. In addition,
when interaction records are sparse and preference propagation
is limited, we can further incorporate user historical interactions
into prompts, enabling LLMs to serve as sequential recommenders.
These two improvement strategies can be denoted as follows:
RB+R = 𝑓LLM(𝑀𝑟
𝑢 ; 𝑀𝑠
𝑢 ;{𝑀𝑐1, . . . , 𝑀 𝑐𝑛}) (7)
RB+H = 𝑓LLM(𝑀𝑠
𝑢 ;{𝑀𝑖1, . . . , 𝑀 𝑖𝑚};{𝑀𝑐1, . . . , 𝑀 𝑐𝑛}) (8)
where 𝑀𝑟𝑢 is the retrieved specialized preference from the long-term
memory of user agent 𝑢 by taking the memories of candidate items
as queries, and{𝑀𝑖1,··· , 𝑀𝑖𝑚} are the corresponding memories of
the 𝑚 historical interactions with items{𝑖1, . . . , 𝑖𝑚}.
Based on the optimized user agents and item agents, our method
can better simulate diverse interaction behaviors observed in the
real world, such as user-item interactions, users’ social behaviors,
and even collective behaviors within recommender systems. More-
over, since we activate items as agents, it enables us to explore
the potential feasibility of “inventing” more novel and fascinating
interactions among inanimate objects. For example, item-to-item
agent interaction can be useful in item cold-start scenarios by spon-
taneously propagating collected user preference to new items (See
Section 3.4.2 for in-depth analysis experiments).
3 EXPERIMENTS
3.1 Experimental Setup
3.1.1 Datasets. Following previous work [17, 18], we conduct ex-
periments on two text-intensive subsets of Amazon review dataset [36]:
“CDs and Vinyl” and “Office Products”. Due to expensive API calls,
we have to further sample subsets from these two datasets. Specifi-
cally, considering the effect of data sparsity on collaborative filter-
ing recommenders, we randomly sample two subsets (one dense
and one sparse) from each dataset, with each subset containing
100 users, exploring more diverse interaction scenarios. The statis-
tics of the datasets are summarized in Table 1. Note that we use
the dense datasets for further analysis experiments, as they better
demonstrate the interactions among agents.
Table 1: Statistics of the preprocessed datasets. “Avg.c” is the
average number of words in initialized item description text.
Datasets #Users #Items #Inters. Sparsity Avg.c
CDs (full) 93,653 64,032 1,178,439 99.98% 8.04
–Sparse 100 704 800 98.86% 7.76
–Dense 100 269 800 97.03% 8.47
Office (full) 86,530 25,842 675,683 99.97% 25.14
–Sparse 100 561 600 98.93% 25.06
–Dense 100 188 600 96.81% 25.48
3.1.2 Evaluation Metrics. To evaluate the performance, we take
NDCG@K as a metric, where K is set to 1, 5 and 10. Following
existing studies [18, 63], we employ the leave-one-out strategy for
evaluation. Specifically, we consider the last item in each historical
interaction sequence as the ground-truth item. By adopting the
model as a ranker, we rank the target item alongside nine randomly
sampled items. To further reduce randomness, we conduct three
repetitions of all test instances and report the average results.
3.1.3 Baseline Models. We compare the proposed method with the
following baseline methods:
• BPR [41] leverages matrix factorization to learn the represen-
tations of users and items by optimizing the BPR loss.
• SASRec [23] captures the sequential patterns of user historical
interactions by utilizing a transformer-encoder.
• Pop ranks candidates based on their popularity, which is mea-
sured by the number of interactions.
• BM25 [42] ranks candidates according to their textual similar-
ity with user historical interactions.
• LLMRank [19] uses the ChatGPT as a zero-shot ranker, con-
sidering user sequential interaction histories as conditions.
For our approach, we consider three major variants: AgentCFB,
AgentCFB+R, and AgentCFB+H (corresponding to Equation (6), (7),
and (8), respectively). As our simulated user and item agents are
optimized on sampled datasets, we compare our method with BPR
and SASRec by training them on the sampled datasets, referred to
as BPRsample and SASRecsample. We also report the performance
of these two models when trained on the complete dataset for ref-
erence, denoted as BPRfull and SASRecfull. The Pop model, which
relies on statistics to make recommendations, is trained on the
complete datasets. Since LLMRank and BM25 are zero-shot mod-
els, training them on the complete dataset would be meaningless.
Therefore, we directly evaluate their performance on the sampled
datasets. Scaling agents for larger datasets is left as future work.
3.2 Overall Performance
We compare our approach with the baseline methods on four
datasets and present the results in Table 2. We can find:
(1) Our approach outperforms other baselines in most scenarios,
highlighting the effectiveness of collaborative learning for simu-
lating personalized agents. Specifically, the performance achieved
by adopting our model as a collaborative filtering recommender
(AgentCFB) demonstrates the efficacy of preference propagation in
modeling the collaborative filtering idea. In addition, retrieving user

Conference acronym ’XX, August 03–05, 2022, Woodstock, NY Zhang, et al.
Table 2: Performance comparison of different models. We highlight the best and the second-best among traditional recom-
menders trained on sampled datasets, tuning-free models, and our approach, using bold and underlined fonts, respectively.
Method
CDssparse CDsdense Officesparse Officedense
N@1 N@5 N@10 N@1 N@5 N@10 N@1 N@5 N@10 N@1 N@5 N@10
BPRfull 0.1900 0.4902 0.5619 0.3900 0.6784 0.7089 0.1600 0.3548 0.4983 0.5600 0.7218 0.7625
SASRecfull 0.3300 0.5680 0.6381 0.5800 0.7618 0.7925 0.2500 0.4106 0.5467 0.4700 0.6226 0.6959
BPRsample 0.1300 0.3597 0.4907 0.1300 0.3485 0.4812 0.0100 0.2709 0.4118 0.1200 0.2705 0.4576
SASRecsample 0.1900 0.3948 0.5308 0.1300 0.3151 0.4676 0.0700 0.2775 0.4437 0.3600 0.5027 0.6137
Pop 0.1100 0.2802 0.4562 0.0400 0.1504 0.3743 0.1100 0.2553 0.4413 0.0700 0.2273 0.4137
BM25 0.0800 0.3066 0.4584 0.0600 0.2624 0.4325 0.1200 0.2915 0.4693 0.0600 0.3357 0.4540
LLMRank 0.1367 0.3109 0.4715 0.1333 0.3689 0.4946 0.1750 0.3340 0.4728 0.2067 0.3881 0.4928
AgentCFB 0.1900 0.3466 0.5019 0.2067 0.4078 0.5328 0.1650 0.3359 0.4781 0.2067 0.4217 0.5335
AgentCFB+R 0.2300 0.4373 0.5403 0.2333 0.4142 0.5405 0.1900 0.3589 0.5062 0.1933 0.3916 0.5247
AgentCFB+H 0.1500 0.4004 0.5115 0.2100 0.4164 0.5198 0.2133 0.4379 0.5076 0.1600 0.3986 0.5147
Table 3: Ablation study on two sampled datasets.
Variants
CDsdense Officedense
N@1 N@10 N@1 N@10
AgentCFB 0.2067 0.5328 0.2067 0.5335
𝑤/𝑜 Auto. Interaction 0.1200 0.4964 0.1733 0.5031
𝑤/𝑜 User Agent 0.1100 0.4693 0.2200 0.5145
𝑤/𝑜 Item Agent 0.1767 0.5128 0.1800 0.5169
agents’ specialized preferences toward candidates (AgentCF B+R)
enables more personalized inferences. In sparse interaction cases
(Office dataset), incorporating user historical interactions to en-
hance the prompt and enabling LLMs to serve as a sequential rec-
ommender (AgentCFB+H ) can make better performance.
(2) Our model exhibits superior or comparable performance to
traditional recommendation models when trained on datasets of
the same scale (sampled datasets). Furthermore, our model even
achieves comparable performance to traditional recommenders
trained on full datasets, when dealing with sparse scenarios. Al-
though our model still has room for improvement in other scenarios,
it is worth emphasizing that our model is trained using only ap-
proximately 0.07% of the complete dataset. These results further
demonstrate the generalization capability of our approach.
(3) Existing tuning-free methods, such as Pop, BM25, and LLM-
Rank, exhibit unsatisfactory performance. Specifically, although
LLMRank employs ChatGPT to model user preferences by introduc-
ing user historical interactions as prompts, similar to conclusions
in [19, 33], its performance falls significantly behind that of tra-
ditional models. This highlights the gap between user behavior
patterns and universal knowledge of LLMs, which hinders the effec-
tiveness of LLMs in capturing user preferences from their behaviors.
3.3 Further Model Analyses
3.3.1 Ablation Study. Our proposed agent-based collaborative fil-
tering approach contains the agents’ autonomous interaction part,
the optimization of user agents, and the optimization of item agents.
The details of prompts are presented in Appendix C. To verify the
effectiveness of each component, we conduct the ablation study on
two dense datasets and record the results in Table 3.
(1) 𝑤/𝑜 Autonomous Interaction: In this scenario, we directly
provide real user interaction records to agents, and prompt them
to explore the reasons behind real user’s decisions. The perfor-
mance gap reveals that comparing agents’ autonomous interactions
with real-world interaction records can generate comprehensive
feedback about the misalignment between simulated agents and
real-world individuals, which enhances the efficacy of reflection.
(2) 𝑤/𝑜 User Agent: To remove user agent optimization, we di-
rectly represent each user with their historical interactions, without
any memory update. The performance decline indicates that the
simple verbalized text of user interaction behavior can not reflect
user underlying preferences, emphasizing the efficacy of adjusting
agents’ personalized memories by enabling them to autonomously
simulate real user behaviors. Although prompting LLMs with user
historical interactions can yield better results in the Office dataset,
we argue that this is due to the dataset’s longer item description text,
allowing LLMs to effectively serve as sequential recommenders.
However, even in this case, stimulating LLM-powered item agents
can lead to improved performance, further demonstrating the sig-
nificance of facilitating items to capture preferences of adopters.
(3) 𝑤/𝑜 Item Agent: Not optimizing item agents (i.e., representing
items with corresponding identity information) also leads to worse
performance, highlighting the effectiveness of behavior-involved
item-side modeling in capturing two-sided interaction relations
between users and items. Notably, item agents play a crucial role in
simulating collaborative filtering recommender systems, by updat-
ing their memory with user preference information and propagating
this information to new agents through interactions.
3.3.2 Performance Copmarison w.r.t. Position Bias and Popularity
Bias. In this part, we evaluate our approach’s ability to simulate per-
sonalized agents, by obliquely examining whether they are suscepti-
ble to position and popularity bias in ranking candidates, as general

AgentCF: Collaborative Learning with Autonomous Language Agents for Recommender Systems Conference acronym ’XX, August 03–05, 2022, Woodstock, NY
0 1 2 3 4
Ground-Truth Item Pos.
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75NDCG@10
Position Bias in CDs
AgentCF
LLMRank
0 1 2 3 4
Pos. in the Ranked List
0.20
0.4
0.60
0.8
1
Item Frequency
Popularity Bias in CDs
AgentCF LLMRank
0 1 2 3 4
Ground-Truth Item Pos.
0.50
0.55
0.60
0.65
0.70
0.75NDCG@10
Position Bias in Office
AgentCF
LLMRank
0 1 2 3 4
Pos. in the Ranked List
0.20
0.4
0.60
0.8
1
Item Frequency
Popularity Bias in Office
AgentCF LLMRank
Figure 2: Analysis of whether our approach can simulate personalized agents to mitigate position bias and popularity bias.
Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Test
After optimizing at a specific step
0.07
0.48 0.5
0.66
0.95 0.96 0.95
CDs
Before optimizing at a specific step
Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Test
After optimizing at a specific step
0.13
0.34
0.45
0.63
0.97
0.92 0.93
Office
Before optimizing at a specific step
Figure 3: Performance comparison w.r.t. the progress of opti-
mization. The Y-axis denotes the proportion of agents mak-
ing accurate choices. The X-axis denotes the step of optimiza-
tion. “Test” indicates the results in the test dataset.
LLMs heavily rely on such common-sense knowledge to make judg-
ments. The results in Figure 2 show that an LLM prompted by user
historical interactions (LLMRank) is influenced by both popularity
bias and position bias. It tends to select popular items and those
positioned higher. In contrast, our approach, although inevitably
affected by these biases, performs enhanced stability. This confirms
that our approach simulates personalized user agents, enabling
them to rank candidates based on their personalized preferences
rather than relying solely on general knowledge.
3.3.3 Effectiveness of Collaborative Reflection. To explore the ef-
ficacy of collaborative reflection in agent optimization, we eval-
uate the change in the alignment between agents and real users
as optimization progresses. In this experiment, we extract the last
three interactions from user behavior sequences to optimize agents,
which we refer to as three optimization steps. At each step of opti-
mization, we test whether these agents can select the positive item
from two candidates before and after optimization. As illustrated
in Figure 3, continuous optimization enables user agents to align
their preferences with real users, leading to an increasing number
making correct choices on initial attempts (i.e., before optimizing
at this step). Moreover, around 95% of user agents can make correct
choices after collaborative reflection, highlighting its effectiveness.
3.4 Simulations on Other Types of Interactions
3.4.1 User-user Interaction Simulation. Real-world users often seek
advice from others when interacting with unfamiliar items. For
example, they may browse reviews on shopping websites or consult
with friends for information. To explore whether user agents can
0 1 Neg 1 Pos 2 Pos 3 Pos
Num. of Viewed Reviews
0
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80Agents Purchase Proportion
CDs
Similar
Dissimilar
0 1 Neg 1 Pos 2 Pos 3 Pos
Num. of Viewed Reviews
0
0.20
0.40
0.60
0.80Agents Purchase Proportion
Office
Similar
Dissimilar
Figure 4: Proportion of agents buying items after viewing
reviews. “Similar” means that the reviews are written by
users with similar preferences to test users. “Neg” indicates
that the review is negative.
exhibit similar social behaviors, we simulate user-user interaction
via AgentCF, where user agents read and write reviews. Specifically,
given the test items that test users haven’t interacted with, we first
ask other user agents, who have previously interacted with these
items, to write reviews. The test users are then prompted to read
these reviews and make decisions. We compare the decisions of
the test users before and after viewing these reviews and present
the results in Figure 4. As we can see, the simulated user agents
exhibit behaviors akin to those of real users. They show a growing
inclination to purchase items upon encountering positive reviews,
refrain from purchasing after encountering negative reviews, and
trust reviews from users with similar preferences. We present the
user agents’ explanations for attitude changes after viewing reviews,
as well as their discussions about items in Appendix C.2.
3.4.2 Item-item Interaction Simulation. Recommender systems face
challenges in suggesting new items. In this part, we aim to alleviate
the cold-start problem by exploring autonomous interactions be-
tween new and popular item agents. Specifically, we prompt these
new item agents, equipped with identity information such as titles
and categories, to interact with and learn from popular item agents
that have extensive interaction records. This helps warm up cold-
start item agents by estimating adopter preferences and adjusting
their memory. Then we prompt user agents to rank the new items
among nine other randomly sampled but well-trained items, and
compare the ranking results obtained using cold-start memory and
adjusted memory. As illustrated in Figure 5, the interaction pro-
cess enhances the propagation of collected user preferences to new
items and improves ranking performance. Notably, we find that

Conference acronym ’XX, August 03–05, 2022, Woodstock, NY Zhang, et al.
0 1 Dist 1 Sim 2 Sim 3 Sim
Num. of Interacted Item.
0.46
0.48
0.50
0.52
0.54
0.56NDCG@10
CDs
0 1 Dist 1 Sim 2 Sim 3 Sim
Num. of Interacted Item.
0.44
0.46
0.48
0.50
0.52NDCG@10
Office
Figure 5: Performance comparisons w.r.t. cold-start item
agents’ interactions with different popular item agents. “Dist”
means that the interacted item has distinct identity informa-
tion compared to the cold-start item. “Sim” means similar.
even interactions with agents that differ in identity information can
also alleviate the cold-start problem to some extent. This implies
that the new item agents do not simply replicate other agents’s
memories, but rather comprehend the relationship between identity
information and personalized memory. It indicates that item-item
interactions activated by AgentCF benefit recommender systems.
3.4.3 Process of Preference Propagation. As previously mentioned,
our approach achieves preference propagation via collaborative
optimization. Here we illustrate this process in detail. Specifically,
we first initialize the memory of a seed user agent with special
preference descriptions that do not spontaneously emerge during
normal optimization. The user and item agents are then prompted
to autonomously interact and optimize their memories. We show-
case the optimized memories of several agents in Figure 6. As we
can see, through collaborative optimization, user and item agents
mutually interact, acting as bridges that facilitate the propagation of
their preferences to other agents with similar interaction behaviors.
To assess preference propagation efficiency, we ask each user agent
about their possession of the seed user’s preferences. The results are
presented in Figure 7. We observe that through continuous interac-
tions, an increasing number of user agents with similar behaviors
to the seed user can express similar preferences. Additionally, as the
interaction scope expands, the proportion of user agents expressing
such preference gradually decreases. This indicates that informa-
tion decay during the propagation process, in line with real-world
information diffusion principles [56]. These results demonstrate
the potential of our method in developing collaborative filtering
systems as a cradle for potential collective intelligence.
3.4.4 Collaborative Advertisements Creation. Existing work indi-
cates that cooperation among multiple LLMs can improve the re-
sults generated by individual LLM [28, 51]. This is a manifestation of
collective intelligence. To explore its potential in recommender sys-
tems, we simulate a typical scenario: the creation of advertisements.
Specifically, we simulate several advertiser agents proficient in dif-
ferent aspects of advertising, such as personalization, creativity, and
attractiveness. Given an advertisement draft generated by individ-
ual LLM, we prompt these agents to critique and offer suggestions,
aiming to generate higher-quality advertisements. As illustrated
in Figure 8, through the collaboration among these agents, our
approach utilizes the strengths of each aspect and generates more
appealing advertisements for users.
: User Preference : Item Feature : Interaction
Seed User Agent:I tend to favor music that evokes emotions and
resonates with me.
Updated Item Agent A: ‘Satch Plays Fats’. This CD combines
compositions with powerful vocals. The emotions evoked by the
music continue to resonate with listeners.
Updated User Agent B:I prefer CDs with feature compositions and
powerful vocals, evoking emotions that resonate over time.
Updated Item Agent C: ‘Sticky Fingers’ is a classic rock and
AOR CD, with compositions and vocals that create an
emotional experience, resonating deeply overtime.
1-stInter.2-nd Inter.3-rd Inter.
Figure 6: Case Study of preference propagation. The prefer-
ences of user and item agents are respectively propagated to
other agents with similar behaviors through interactions.
Source 1 Hop 2 Hop 3 Hop
Interaction Scope
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5Proportion (/ all users)
ratio within all users
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Proportion (/ users in a hop)
1 1
0.8125
0.6415
CDs
ratio within a hop
Source 1 Hop 2 Hop 3 Hop
Interaction Scope
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4Proportion (/ all users)
ratio within all users
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Proportion (/ users in a hop)
1
0.83
0.75
0.55
Office
ratio within a hop
Figure 7: The proportions of user agents having seed user’s
preferences after continuous preference propagation.
Creative
Personalized
Attractive
Advertiser
User Agent Evaluation
IndividualLLM Output Ads
Introducing the ‘Y es I Am’ CD, a musical
masterpiece that will captivate your sense and
leave you craving for more……
Collaboration: Critique & Sug.
: Add specific examples of its genres
: Highlight the CD's standout feature
: Emphasize its unique qualities
Refined Ads
Immerse yourself in the raw emotion of
heartfelt lyricsand the exceptional vocal
performances…an innovative blend of
genres…Featuring an extraordinary lineup of
renowned artists.
🙅It lacks specific detail
about the artists and
tracks…
😍Its heartfelt lyrics
aligns with my
preference…
Its renowned artists
piques my interest
For draft ads
For refined ads
Figure 8: A case about user distinct attitudes towards adver-
tisements generated by an individual agent versus advertise-
ments optimized through multi-agent debate.
4 RELATED WORK
LLM-powered Agents. Recently, LLM-powered agents have shown
the potential to develop Artificial General Intelligence (AGI) due to
their capabilities in reasoning and planning [47, 61]. Equipped with
memory [29, 44] and reflection [35, 43] modules, these agents can
store their past experiences and make better decisions for future

AgentCF: Collaborative Learning with Autonomous Language Agents for Recommender Systems Conference acronym ’XX, August 03–05, 2022, Woodstock, NY
behaviors. Numerous studies have been proposed to employ agents
for simulating human-like interactions, including daily lives in
smallville [39], debate [5, 10, 28], and even game-playing [6, 15, 45].
These studies inspire us to explore the application of LLM-powred
agents in simulating user-item interactions.
Language Model For Recommendation . Numerous attempts
have been made to leverage language models for solving recom-
mendation tasks [11, 27, 30, 53]. Specifically, these studies mainly
prompt language models to infer user preferences based on user
historical interactions [ 13, 24, 58]. However, due to the gap be-
tween universal knowledge of LLMs and domains-specific user
behavior patterns, they may fall short in providing personalized
recommendations [20, 59]. To solve this, several studies propose to
incorporate knowledge of LLMs to enhance recommendation mod-
els, rather than taking LLMs as recommenders [49, 54]. Some work
also specializes LLMs for recommendation by fine-tuning them on
recommendation data, which can be time-consuming [1, 2, 7, 8, 14,
26, 31, 52, 62]. Recently, researchers attempt to incorporate agents
into recommender systems, focusing on facilitating recommenda-
tions or user behavior simulations [20–22, 48, 50]. However, these
studies mainly focus on user behavior, neglecting the modeling of
user-item relations, which is the core of recommender systems. Un-
like these methods, we further regard items as agents and propose
the agent-based collaborative filtering approach, enabling user and
item agents to model their two-sided relations.
5 CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we proposed AgentCF, an agent-based collaborative
filtering approach for simulating user-item interactions in recom-
mender systems. We creatively consider not only users but also
items as agents, allowing for the modeling of their two-sided re-
lations through interactions of LLM-powered agents. Specifically,
we develop a collaborative learning approach that optimizes both
kinds of agents together, where these agents perform autonomous
interactions and reflect on the disparities between their decisions
and real-world interaction records. During this process, user and
item agents mutually align their preferences, and propagate this
information to other agents in subsequent interactions, implicitly
modeling the collaborative filtering idea. The simulated user and
item agents exhibit human-like behaviors in various types of inter-
actions (user-item, user-user, item-item, and collective interactions),
demonstrating the effectiveness of AgentCF.
In the future, we will explore more types of real-world scenarios
and their corresponding interactions. In addition, AgentCF is a small
step to simulate not only humans but also inanimate objects with
LLM-based agents. It holds the promise of enhancing inanimate
objects with autonomy and emerging intellectual agent ecosystems
that connect everything, which will be studied in our future work.
