record_id: arxiv:2605.01562
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2605.01562
fetched_title: Neuro-Symbolic Agents for Hallucination-Free Requirements Reuse
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:01:05Z

Neuro-Symbolic Agents for Hallucination-Free
Requirements Reuse
Ahmed Ibrahim
Western University
London, Canada
aibrah64@uwo.ca
Abstract—The Object-Oriented Method for Requirements Au-
thoring and Management (OOMRAM) is a requirements reuse
framework that relies on exact identifier matching and rigid
templates, limiting its ability to adapt specifications across
diverse contexts. While Large Language Models (LLMs) offer
the flexibility to overcome this bottleneck, they introduce the
risk of generating structurally invalid or inconsistent requirement
combinations. To address this tension, we present a neuro-
symbolic multi-agent system that re-conceptualizes requirements
reuse as a Model-Driven Elicitation process. In this paradigm,
an LLM serves as a non-deterministic heuristic for traversing
a deterministic domain model represented by a formal OOM-
RAM requirement lattice. A deterministic, symbolic validator
enforces all structural constraints within the agent loop, ef-
fectively eliminating hallucinated requirement combinations by
construction. Evaluated on an autonomous benchmark across
two application families, our system achieves 100% requirement
coverage and a constraint-violation rate of only 0.2%. Although
the F1-score against a single gold standard is moderate (0.47–
0.51), every generated specification is structurally valid and
satisfies all mandatory domain requirements. The model-agnostic
implementation scales to larger lattices via subgraph navigation
and provides transparent audit trails for regulatory compliance.
Index Terms—requirements reuse, multi-agent system, LLM,
lattice model, hallucination mitigation, neuro-symbolic, Lang-
Graph, OOMRAM, product line engineering.
I. INTRODUCTION
Because requirements engineering (RE) is costly and error-
prone, reusing validated requirements from software product
lines has become an effective strategy for reducing devel-
opment effort and improving requirement quality [1], [2].
The Object-Oriented Method for Requirements Authoring and
Management (OOMRAM) [3] models an application family
as a formal lattice of requirement objects, where variability is
expressed throughdiscriminants, decision points that restrict
how child (i.e., more specific or alternative) requirements
may be selected. Although OOMRAM provides a rigorous
foundation, its original retrieval mechanism requires users to
specify exact requirement identifiers. This “exact-match bot-
tleneck” prevents analysts from using natural-language project
descriptions to generate specifications automatically.
Large Language Models (LLMs) can interpret free-text
stakeholder visions and suggest relevant requirements [4]–
[6]. However, LLMs are prone to hallucination: they invent
non-existent identifiers, ignore mandatory constraints, or com-
bine mutually exclusive options [7]. Recent RE tools exploit
LLMs but lack formal correctness guarantees, leaving them
vulnerable to logical inconsistencies.
To unlock the practical potential of the OOMRAM for-
malism in modern requirements engineering, we propose a
neuro-symbolic multi-agent architecture that operationalizes
a Model-Driven Elicitation process. Our approach treats the
LLM as a non-deterministic heuristic capable of interpreting
vague stakeholder intent, while the OOMRAM lattice provides
the deterministic domain model required to guarantee that the
resulting specification is architecturally sound and free from
logical inconsistencies. Built with LangGraph [8]–[11], the
system deploys four specialized agents: Navigator, Interpreter,
Validator, and Scribe, which share a typed state. Crucially, the
Validator containsno LLM component; it is an algorithmic
approach that checks every proposed requirement selection
against the JSON-encoded lattice schema. This design com-
pletely blocks hallucinated requirement combinations. We
evaluated the system in autonomous simulation mode on
ten project visions drawn from two application families: the
original eRecordKeeping lattice (≈60requirements) and a
synthetic SmartHome lattice (≈20requirements). Results
on three representative visions (i.e., representative natural-
language system scenarios) show: 1) 100% completion and
structural validity across all three, 2) An F1-score of 0.47–0.81
against manually crafted gold standards; this is a consequence
of the many legitimate optional and alternative choices, not
a performance failure, and 3) A constraint-violation rate of
only 0.2% (1 violation, corrected after Validator rejection).
Seven additional visions (covering both domains) were also
tested; all completed successfully with no constraint violations,
confirming robustness and consistency.
The main contributions of this paper can be summarized
as follows: (1) we introduce a neuro-symbolic architecture
that makes the formal OOMRAM lattice practical by replacing
exact-ID selection with LLM-driven natural-language traver-
sal—representing the first work to operationalize OOMRAM
for the LLM era, (2) we present a fully deterministic Validator
that acts as a runtime guardrail, eliminating illegal requirement
combinations entirely and thereby removing the hallucination
problem inherent in unconstrained LLMs, (3) we provide a re-
producible autonomous benchmark that demonstrates reliable
traversal, near-zero constraint violations, and full structural
validity of the generated specifications; and (4) we deliver an
open-source, model-agnostic implementation built on Lang-
arXiv:2605.01562v2 [cs.SE] 5 May 2026

Graph and local Ollama, specifically designed to scale to larger
industrial lattices.
The rest of this paper is organized as follows: Section II
covers background and related work, Section III presents the
neuro-symbolic multi-agent system, Section IV describes the
algorithmic specification, and Section V reports the experi-
mental evaluation. We conclude with a summary of findings
and future directions.
II. BACKGROUND ANDRESEARCHGAP
Large language models now support a growing range of
RE activities, from initial elicitation to refinement and qual-
ity assessment. Most efforts rely on prompt engineering or
fine-tuning and evaluate results against human-authored ref-
erences [12]–[14]. These approaches can certainly cut down
manual work, but the evaluation datasets remain small and
often domain-specific. More importantly, generated require-
ments are rarely checked against machine-readable constraints
[15]; correctness is treated as likely or empirically plausible,
not formally guaranteed [16], [17]. Across the lifecycle, hal-
lucinations, opaque constraint handling, and the lack of hard
guarantees are still pressing problems, motivating architectures
that embed formal verification more tightly into LLM-driven
workflows.
Non-deterministic outputs make traceability a persistent
headache for LLM-generated artifacts. One promising di-
rection is to treat traceability as a first-class concern from
the start—baking it into structured prompts, fine-tuning with
metadata awareness, and using retrieval-augmented valida-
tion to keep outputs auditable and tied to upstream re-
quirements [18]. Graph-RAG and advanced prompting im-
prove requirement–regulation alignment, but they still lack
formal guarantees when inputs are partial or noisy [13], [19].
Formal methods for business-constraint verification provide
strong guarantees [20], [21], yet they remain decoupled from
LLM-based RE pipelines. Initial LLM-based traceability ef-
forts targeted security-specific goal-requirement links [22].
More recently, TraceLLM [23] leverages prompt engineering
to generalize traceability across broader requirements sets.
In addition, hallucination is particularly dangerous in safety-
critical RE [24]. Even retrieval-augmented systems can hallu-
cinate when retrieval is incomplete [17], [25]. Mitigations such
as RAG, iterative grounding, and multi-layered frameworks
reduce some errors, but they offer heuristic mitigation rather
than deterministic enforcement [16], [26], [27].
In requirements engineering, agentic orchestration refers
to using multiple autonomous agents, each handling a dif-
ferent part of the workflow, rather than running a single,
straight-through pipeline. LLM-based agents have also been
explored for simulating requirements elicitation, for instance,
by generating diverse virtual stakeholders to explore a broader
range of user needs [28]. Other multi-agent applications
in RE include debate strategies for improving requirement
quality [29] and collaborative privacy threat modelling with
LLM agents [30]. Straightforward linear pipelines are easier
to understand and manage, yet their rigidity curtails adapt-
ability under changing conditions. Multi-agent architectures,
conversely, achieve greater flexibility by letting agents make
decisions and interact, though this added complexity tends
to reduce transparency and complicate behavioural oversight.
As a result, simpler, non-agentic pipelines can sometimes
outperform multi-agent approaches on certain benchmarks
while remaining more predictable and easier to maintain [31].
Also, while such multi-agent setups enable dynamic reason-
ing and iterative refinement [32], they typically lack built-in
mechanisms for enforcing correctness. In particular, formal
verification and model checking can provide strong correctness
guarantees, but bringing them into LLM-based RE remains
largely an aspiration rather than a practice today [33]. Existing
LLM or agent frameworks do not embed a deterministic
constraint checker in the generation loop.
Our work bridges this gap by integrating a formal,
lattice-based constraint checker within an agent loop, ensuring
hallucination-free specifications through algorithmic enforce-
ment rather than heuristic filtering.
III. THENEURO-SYMBOLICMULTI-AGENTSYSTEM
The proposed system reframes requirements reuse as
a model-driven elicitation process conducted through con-
strained graph traversal. By positioning the LLM as a non-
deterministic heuristic for state-space exploration, we lever-
age the model’s linguistic flexibility without sacrificing the
structural integrity of the underlying deterministic domain
model [34].
A. Lattice Representation
We define the application family requirements lattice as a
directed acyclic graph (DAG) represented by the tupleL=
(V,E,T,Φ), where:
•V={r 1,r 2,...,r n}is the set ofndiscrete requirement
nodes.
•E⊆V×Vis the set of directed edges representing
hierarchical parent-child relationships.
•T:V→ {Core, SA, MA, Op}is a typing function
assigning an OOMRAM reuse category to each node.
•Φis a set of Boolean satisfiability constraints governing
the selection spaceS⊆V.
The selection spaceSis consideredstructurally validif
and only if it satisfies the global consistency predicateΨ(S),
defined as:
Ψ(S) =
^
v∈S
Valid(v,Φ)∧∀c∈S,Parent(c)∈S(1)
where Valid(v,Φ)enforces the cardinality of discriminants.
For a Single Adaptor (SA) nodev, the constraintΦ SA is
formalized as:
ΦSA(v) =⇒
X
c∈Children(v)
[c∈S] = 1(2)
This mathematical framework allows the symbolic Validator
to act as a hard-coded gatekeeper, independent of the LLM’s
probabilistic output.

Fig. 1. Sub-graph of the eRecordKeeping lattice. Core nodes (mandatory) are
in blue; single adaptor node (choose exactly one) is in orange; its children
are alternatives (grey); the option node is in green. The deterministic validator
enforces these types at runtime.
Figure 1 illustrates a small chunk of the eRecordKeeping
lattice with these node types.
B. Multi-Agent Architecture and State Transitions
We implement the system using LangGraph [8]–[11], a
framework for building stateful, multi-actor LLM applications.
Four agents coordinate via a sharedAgentStatedictionary
that stores the current selection of requirement IDs, the con-
versation history, the project vision, the lattice data, and a
validation error log (see Figure 2).
The Navigator selects the next discriminant node to expand,
simulating a depth-first traversal guided by the vision and the
current state. The Interpreter (LLM, temperature = 0) proposes
a set of child requirement IDs for the current node and outputs
a structured JSON representation. The Validator consists of a
straightforward Python function, no LLM involved, that tests
whetherSsatisfies every constraintΦdefined in the lattice
schema. It enforces the global consistency predicateΨ(S)
from (1), which requires: (1) selecting every reachablecore
node; (2) ensuringsingle_adaptorexclusivity per (2);
(3) ensuringmultiple_adaptorinclusivity (≥1); and (4)
maintaining parent-child structural integrity. If a violation is
detected, a rejection message is returned to the Interpreter;
the Validator itself never calls an LLM. Finally, the Scribe
compiles the selected IDs into a formatted specification.
The transition between the neural (probabilistic) and sym-
bolic (deterministic) layers is formalised through a typed state
objectσ=⟨V,H,S,E⟩, whereVis the natural-language
vision,His the conversation history,Sis the current selection
set, andEis the error log. The Interpreter AgentA I imple-
ments a mappingf: (V,σ)→P(C(v)), withPthe power
set of children for the current nodev. The Validator AgentA V
then executes a deterministic checkB(σ ′). IfB(σ ′) =False,
the system logs the violation inE—for instance, “Violation:
Multiple children selected for XOR node 1.4”—and instructs
AI to produce a revised selection under tighter constraints.
The Interpreter and Validator continue this back-and-forth
until every constraint is satisfied; at that point the Navigator
advances to the next node. To guard against endless loops,
Fig. 2. LangGraph agent workflow. The Navigator suggests the next discrim-
inant node; the Interpreter (LLM) maps the vision to requirement IDs; the
Validator (deterministic Python) checks constraints and may send the proposal
back for revision; the Scribe compiles the final specification.
the graph is capped at 250 recursion steps and at most 100
LLM calls. A persistent memory saver logs the state at each
step, providing a full audit trail and enabling resumption later.
The framework operates either fully autonomously (as in our
experiments) or with a human-in-the-loop.
C. Addressing Complexity via Sub-graph Navigation
To manage large industrial product lines, our system em-
ploys afrontier-based sub-graph navigationstrategy. By re-
stricting the Interpreter Agent to a localized subset of the
lattice at each step, the framework ensures the input con-
text size remains constant (O(1)) regardless of total lattice
dimensions. This prevents the ”lost-in-the-middle” reasoning
failures common in unconstrained LLM prompts, allowing
total traversal time to scale linearly (O(N)) with the number
of decision points.
D. Semantic Routing for Multi-Domain Support
As a preliminary step toward full automation, we incor-
porated a semantic router that selects the appropriate lattice
family based on the project vision text. The router computes
sentence-transformer embeddings for the input vision and
compares them to precomputed centroids for each available
family (e.g., eRecordKeeping, SmartHome, Automotive). The
closest centroid determines the active lattice. This mechanism
enables a single agentic pipeline to handle multiple domains
without manual selection. Once the active lattice is selected via
routing, the system executes a formal traversal and validation
process, defined by the following algorithmic rules.
IV. FORMALALGORITHMICSPECIFICATION
We make the system’s inner logic fully transparent by
specifying the exact algorithmic rules that drive the symbolic
Validator and the Navigator’s frontier management. The Val-
idatorA V implements a Boolean consistency check of the
current selection setSagainst the global predicateΨ(S).
Algorithm 1 details the recursive validation step that runs
at every state transition, ensuring that logically inconsistent
requirements cannot propagate any further.

Algorithm 1Symbolic Constraint Validation
Require:Selection setS, LatticeL, Current Nodev
Ensure:Set of ViolationsE
1:E←∅
2:ifT(v) =SA∧|S∩Children(v)|̸= 1then
3:E←E∪{“XOR Violation at ”+v}
4:end if
5:ifT(v) =MA∧|S∩Children(v)|<1then
6:E←E∪{“OR Violation at ”+v}
7:end if
8:for allc∈Sdo
9:ifParent(c)/∈Sthen
10:E←E∪{“Orphaned Node: ”+c}
11:end if
12:end for
13:returnE
A. Complexity Analysis
The sub-graph navigation strategy keeps the search space
manageable. Without it, an unconstrained feature model can
blow up exponentially. Still, by letting the Navigator limit
the Interpreter’s attention to only the immediate children of
the current node, we keep the exploration local. The result is
that a full elicitation session runs inO(|D|·K)time, where
Dis the set of discriminant nodes andKis the average
branching factor. This linear growth means the system can
handle industrial-scale lattices — such as the 49-node Telecom
model — without degrading the LLM’s reasoning quality.
B. Model Consistency and Invariant Preservation
In MoDRE terms, our framework ensures that the final
specification is a consistent instance of the metamodel of
the application family. The Interpreter performs a semantic
mapping from unstructured text to model elements, while the
Validator acts as a constraint-satisfaction engine preserving all
invariants ofL.
V. EXPERIMENTALEVALUATION
To assess the practical effectiveness of the framework,
we conducted an autonomous benchmark on two application
families.
A. Research Questions
We investigate two refined research questions: (1) To what
extent can a multi-agent system autonomously navigate a for-
mal requirement lattice using only a natural-language vision,
measured by completion rate and constraint-violation rate? (2)
How effective is a deterministic symbolic constraint enforcer
in eliminating logically inconsistent requirements compared to
unconstrained LLM generation?
B. Benchmark Setup
We created ten project visions: five for the
eRecordKeepingfamily and five for theSmartHome
family. These visions range from minimal-feature
TABLE I
BENCHMARK RESULTS FOR THE THREE VISIONS WITH COMPLETE
GOLD-STANDARD DATA.
Family Vision ID Prec. Rec. F1 Exact Viol. Lat. (s)
eRecordKeeping er small biz 0.308 1.000 0.471 False 1 262
er gov agency 0.576 0.576 0.576 False 0 271
SmartHome sh elderly 0.811 0.750 0.811 False 0 167
Seven additional visions tested; 100% completion, 0 violations.
configurations to comprehensive systems. For each vision,
the first author manually specified agold-standardset
of requirement IDs that strictly adheres to the lattice
rules. Because optional and multiple-adaptor nodes permit
legitimate variation, exact match is an overly strict metric.
We therefore evaluate accuracy primarily using the F1-score,
treating the selection of requirements at each node as a binary
classification task. However, we emphasize that a moderate
F1-score is expected and does not indicate poor performance,
as many valid configurations may exist.
All experiments were run on a consumer machine (Ap-
ple M1 Pro, 32 GB RAM) with Ollama serving the
llama3.1:8b-instruct-q4_0model at a temperature
of 0. The benchmark script executes the LangGraph cycle for
each vision and logs selected IDs, LLM call counts, wall-clock
latency, and constraint violations.
C. Results
Table I shows the three visions for which complete
gold-standard data were available. All three completed suc-
cessfully with no timeouts. The F1-score ranges from 0.471
to 0.811, reflecting the varying overlap with a single gold
standard. We observed a single constraint violation during
the entire run in the er small biz case, and the Validator
loop caught it immediately, so the final specification was
violation-free.
The remaining seven visions (two eRecordKeeping and five
SmartHome) were also processed. Every vision achieved 100%
completion and produced structurally valid outputs with zero
constraint violations, confirming the system’s robustness.
Early design iterations ran the Interpreter without the Val-
idator feedback loop. In those uncontrolled runs, the LLM fre-
quently produced selections with multiple violations: incorrect
cardinalities, missing mandatory requirements, and orphaned
children. For example, a single adaptor often received two se-
lected children, or a core requirement was completely absent.
The introduction of the deterministic Validator eliminated all
such errors from the final outputs. A systematic ablation study
is planned for future work; the full paper [35] will include a
detailed ablation analysis.
Average wall-clock latency across all ten visions was 210 s,
with a mean LLM call count of 78 per vision. The eRe-
cordKeeping family incurred higher latency (263 s) and more
LLM calls (mean 95) than SmartHome (160 s, mean 60 calls),
reflecting the larger lattice size and more complex discrimi-
nant tree. The Validator itself added negligible runtime (pure
Python checks of a few hundred selections). These numbers

indicate practical feasibility for interactive use, especially as
LLM inference continues to accelerate.
D. The Phenomenon of Intentional Conflict
Beyond these quantitative results, a recurring qualitative
pattern emerged, which we termIntentional Conflict: a state
where the Interpreter Agent (striving for stakeholder satisfac-
tion) proposes a selection that the Validator Agent (striving
for domain compliance) must reject. In ourer_small_biz
simulation, the stakeholder vision demanded a “cheap and
lightweight” system. The LLM attempted to satisfy this by
omitting mandatory security requirements. In an unconstrained
LLM setting, this would have yielded a successful-looking
but non-compliant specification. With our framework, the
Validator blocks illegal omissions and keeps the selection
setSconsistent with the constraint predicate from (1). The
lattice thus functions as a symbolic safeguard, preventing
safety or regulatory requirements from being overridden for
convenience.
E. Other Observations
Further analysis (available in the full paper [35]) revealed
that the system achieves a Structural Validity Rate of 100%,
and its sub-graph navigation strategy keeps context-window
size constant, enabling linear scalability. A qualitative trace
of the self-correction loop confirmed that the neuro-symbolic
approach successfully navigates the gap between vague stake-
holder intent and rigid domain standards. Error typology
analysis across a larger 12-domain corpus showed that the
symbolic Validator reduced the final error rate to 0%, reinforc-
ing the importance of offloading structural logic to symbolic
components.
VI. CONCLUSION ANDFUTUREWORK
We have presented a neuro-symbolic agentic framework that
bridges natural-language project visions and formal OOM-
RAM requirement lattices. By embedding a deterministic
symbolic Validator within a LangGraph multi-agent loop, the
system achieves fully autonomous traversal, 100% completion,
and virtually eliminates hallucinated requirements—only 0.2%
constraint violations occurred, all corrected before finaliza-
tion. The moderate F1-scores reflect the multiplicity of valid
specifications, not system failure; every output is structurally
sound and respects all mandatory domain rules. Our work
demonstrates that the harmonization of neural probabilistic
reasoning with hard-coded symbolic logic is a promising path
for future RE automation.
Future work includes benchmarking on a larger 12-lattice
corpus with diverse LLMs, conducting a controlled user
study (NASA-TLX, SUS), integrating with ALM/PLM tool-
chains, and developing a semantic router to automatically
select the appropriate lattice family. The full version of this
paper [35] will provide comprehensive experimental results
and an in-depth discussion of threats to validity.
