record_id: awesome:ggjy:a944cbe68471
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2508.04700
fetched_title: SEAgent: Self-Evolving Computer Use Agent with Autonomous Learning from Experience
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:08:27Z

SEAgent: Self-Evolving Computer Use Agent with
Autonomous Learning from Experience
Zeyi Sun1,2 Ziyu Liu1,2 Yuhang Zang2 Yuhang Cao2
Xiaoyi Dong2,3 Tong Wu3 Dahua Lin2,3 Jiaqi Wang2
1Shanghai Jiao Tong University 2Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory
3The Chinese University of Hong Kong
szy2023@sjtu.edu.cn, wangjiaqi@pjlab.org.cn
https://github.com/SunzeY/SEAgent
Abstract
Repurposing large vision-language models (LVLMs) as computer use agents
(CUAs) has led to substantial breakthroughs, primarily driven by human-labeled
data. However, these models often struggle with novel and specialized software,
particularly in scenarios lacking human annotations. To address this challenge,
we propose SEAgent, an agentic self-evolving framework enabling CUAs to au-
tonomously evolve through interactions with unfamiliar software. Specifically,
SEAgent empowers computer-use agents to autonomously master novel software
environments via experiential learning, where agents explore new software, learn
through iterative trial-and-error, and progressively tackle auto-generated tasks or-
ganized from simple to complex. To achieve this goal, we design a World State
Model for step-wise trajectory assessment, along with a Curriculum Generator
that generates increasingly diverse and challenging tasks. The agent’s policy is
updated through experiential learning, comprised of adversarial imitation of failure
actions and Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) on successful ones. Fur-
thermore, we introduce a specialist-to-generalist training strategy that integrates
individual experiential insights from specialist agents, facilitating the development
of a stronger generalist CUA capable of continuous autonomous evolution. This
unified agent ultimately achieves performance surpassing ensembles of individual
specialist agents on their specialized software. We validate the effectiveness of
SEAgent across five novel software environments within OS-World. Our approach
achieves a significant improvement of 23.2% in success rate, from 11.3% to 34.5%,
over a competitive open-source CUA, i.e., UI-TARS.
1 Introduction
“A new generation of agents will acquire superhuman capabilities by learning predominantly from
experience. ” [55]
— David Silver , Richard S. Sutton
With the rapid development of large vision-language models (LVLMs) [ 61, 16, 7, 64, 42, 5, 60],
computer use agents (CUAs) [ 3, 43, 48, 29, 67] have not only emerged but also demonstrated
increasing practical utility. By leveraging the powerful perception and reasoning capabilities of
LVLMs, these agents can interpret screenshots as visual inputs and operate computers via keyboard
and mouse actions. Despite their promising capabilities, current CUAs [ 47, 46, 12, 19, 6, 34]
primarily depend on costly human-curated datasets [12, 9, 67, 24, 28], which are typically derived
preprint.
arXiv:2508.04700v2 [cs.AI] 12 Aug 2025

Software Specialized RLDirect multi-software RL Software Specialists
Software Generalist
Create light effect on top left
corner and make focus blur
centered on bird’s head.
I’m not familiar with this
software for image editing.
Task
Gen
Action
Eval
Initial
Action Model
Specialist
Action Model
Step1. Click the filter panel
to create light effect...
Create light effect on top left
corner and make focus blur
centered on bird’s head.
Trying to learn all
the software at once
is too hard for me...
State
Caption
Figure 1: SEAgent enables computer use agents self-evolving in novel environments by au-
tonomously exploring and learning from their own experiences without human intervention. The
specialist-to-generalist training strategy further enhances the development of a strong generalist agent.
from demonstrations [34, 78, 18, 51, 75] or video tutorials in the wild [70]. However, new software
continuously emerges and existing software may regularly be updated, often in the absence of
annotated human data. It is both necessary and timely to enter an era that emphasizes learning from
experience [55] in CUA domain. In this paper, we aim to enable CUAs to autonomously explore
unfamiliar software environments and evolve into experts without relying on human supervision.
To address this challenge, we propose SEAgent, an agentic self-evolving framework in which
Computer Use Agents (CUAs) are exposed to previously unfamiliar software environments and
engage in autonomous exploration and experiential learning, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Enabling such self-
evolution requires addressing two key challenges: (1) generating executable tasks within unfamiliar
software environments, and (2) accurately assessing task success and precisely identifying the step
at which failure occurs. To this end, we introduce a World State Model for environmental state
captioning and step-wise trajectory assessment, together with a Curriculum Generator powered by
a continuously updated software guidebook memory to generate increasingly diverse and challenging
tasks, thereby establishing a curriculum learning paradigm. The agent’s policy is optimized through
experiential learning from both failures and successes, combining adversarial imitation of failure
actions and Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) on successful ones.
Given the critical role of reward accuracy, we conduct extensive evaluations and observe that existing
reward models of computer use tasks fall short in terms of judgment precision and reward density.
Leveraging the enhanced long-context processing capabilities of advanced LVLMs, we input the
agent’s full trajectory of states into the reward model and fine-tune a reward model, World State
Model, using Qwen2.5-VL [7], substantially narrowing the gap with commercial models such as
GPT-4o [42] with +7.5% improvement in precision compared to baseline model in evaluating CUAs’
trajectories on AgentRewardBench [35], enable World State Model to provide high quality step level
reward signals in self-evolving agentic system.
Moreover, SEAgent enables agents to evolve into either single-software specialists or multi-software
generalists. To overcome the limitation that directly training a generalist underperforms compared to
specialists, inspired by [77], we introduce a novel specialist-to-generalist training strategy, which
even surpasses the performance of individual specialists on their respective software applications.
We perform extensive experiments of SEAgent built on UI-TARS [48] and evaluated on five profes-
sional software applications from OSWorld [68]. SEAgent with the specialist-to-generalist strategy
significantly improves the UI-TARS [48] from 11.3% to 34.5%. Furthermore, SEAgent with the
2

specialist-to-generalist strategy (34.5%) outperforms both specialist RL (32.2%) and generalist
RL (30.6%) by a substantial margin, demonstrating the effectiveness of the specialist-to-generalist
paradigm. In general, SEAgent offers a promising approach for developing more powerful and
versatile computer-use agents without human involvement.
2 Related Work
Agent for Computer Use. With the recent advances in LLMs and LVLMs [61, 16, 30, 7, 64], which
enable human-level perception and reasoning capabilities, the development of agents for computer use
has garnered significant attention [22, 20, 11, 41, 29]. These agents either rely solely on structured
text inputs [47, 40, 46, 26, 36] or, in a more human-like manner, use multi-modal inputs such as
screenshots combined with textual conditions [21, 29, 67, 43]. Although they have been extensively
studied and show strong performance on in-domain benchmarks [34, 79, 31, 27, 11], computer use
agents still lag significantly behind human-level performance in simulated environments [ 68, 50,
25, 80]. This gap highlights the challenges posed by the multi-dimensional demands on LVLMs,
including grounding, decision-making, and reasoning. Some approaches address this by decomposing
tasks into specialized expert models [15, 62] and employing agent collaboration [1, 2, 32, 74] through
prompt engineering [71, 19, 76, 63, 66]. However, improvements from these training-free methods
remain limited without fine-tuning. In this work, we explore the next phase of computer use agents,
where a pretrained agent is fine-tuned to learn from its own experience, enabling self-evolution on
novel, specialized software without human annotations.
Reinforcement Learning for LLMs/LVLMs. Previous scalable training efforts for LLMs and
LVLMs [61, 16, 30, 7, 64, 69, 59, 58, 13] have primarily relied on supervised fine-tuning (SFT) [30,
65]. Analogous to imitation learning or behavior cloning in reinforcement learning (RL), SFT
trains models to produce desired outputs based on labeled data, making it heavily dependent on
high-quality human-curated procedures. Recently, DeepSeek-R1 [17] demonstrated strong reasoning
capabilities via Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO) [53] using verifiable rewards. Earlier
works [44, 82, 49] have also employed RL for single-turn optimization from human feedback.
However, in agentic scenarios such as computer usage—where feedback is sparse with reward signals
often results from multi-step interactions—it becomes crucial to introduce stable, step-level reward
signals. Prior RL approaches for agents [ 6, 47, 81, 73, 8] have fine-tuned their own critic models
for advantage estimation [52], either using output reward models (ORMs) trained on labeled data
or adopting Direct Preference Optimization (DPO) [49] based on interaction data [46, 48]. In this
work, we investigate various strategies for constructing high-performing reward models for CUAs
and find that full-process-based analysis yields more accurate evaluations with fine-grained reward
signals compared to training dedicated critic models for advantage estimation as done in [6, 47] or
with filtered behavior cloning [45, 10].
3 Methods
Problem Formulation. The objective of SEAgent is to establish a training pipeline enabling the
Computer Use Agent (CUA) to autonomously explore its environment (Sec. 3.1) and progressively
self-evolve on novel software applications via reinforcement learning from experience (Sec. 3.2).
Specifically, the SEAgent pipeline comprises three primary components: an Actor Modelπ perform-
ing exploratory actions to accomplish these tasks, and a World State ModelMstate describing the
current environment state and evaluating the success or failure of executed actions, and a Curriculum
GeneratorMtask that continuously proposes more diverse and challenging exploration tasks:
(1) Actor Modelπ: The policyπ(a|st,I ) defines the probability of taking actiona at time stept,
conditioned on the current statest and the overall task instructionI.
(2) World State ModelMstate: This component is a fine-tuned Large Vision-Language Model
(LVLM) responsible for providing detailed descriptions of environment states. It also evaluates
each step of the trajectory executed by the Actor Model π, producing trajectory judgement J
which indicates whether the task has been successfully completed. Joint training with state change
captioningC of the software GUI has been shown to enhance judgment accuracy, as shown in Table 1.
3

Curriculum
Generator
Screenshot
Action
Software Agent
Task Buffer
Trajectory
World State Model
Positive Action Negative Action
Window
Grounding
time text testInput Text
Click Point
Trajectory
Description
Actor
Grades
Software Guidebook Memory
Policy Update
Curriculum
Actor
World State ModelCurriclum Generator
Actor’s Grades
TrajectoriesTask buffer
Guidance
Phased Iteration
Draw a green rectangle
with 50% transparency.
Draw a rectangle.
Create a 50% transparency
green background for the title.
Update
Task Sampling
World State Judgement Task evolving
Rule Based Verifiers
Autonomous RL
Environment
Adversarial Imitation
GRPO with verifiable rewards
Figure 2: SEAgent autonomous exploration and experiential learning pipeline. Guided by tasks
generated by the Curriculum Generator, the Actor Model is updated according to step-level rewards
from the World State Model through verifiable reward functions tailored for different action types.
(3) Curriculum GeneratorMtask: This component utilizes a powerful Large Language Model
(LLM) to automatically generate novel exploration tasks. It also maintains and updates a software
guidebookU based on the state change captioningC and the trajectory judgementJ provided by
Mstate during interactions. The gradually enriched guidebook U enablesMtask to progressively
generate increasingly diverse and challenging tasks in a curriculum learning fashion.
SEAgent can be applied to enable the self-evolution of a computer-use agent, either as a specialist for
a single software or as a generalist across multiple software. However, we observe that direct training
for generalist agents is suboptimal. We introduce a specialist-to-generalist training strategy, which
achieves even better overall performance than training multiple generalist agents, as discussed in
Sec. 3.3.
3.1 Autonomous Exploration with Self-evolving Curriculum
Autonomous exploration is essential for enabling the Computer Use Agent (CUA) to develop profi-
ciency in novel software applications that are previously unseen or poorly understood. This process
involves addressing two key challenges: (1) generating executable tasks within unfamiliar software
environments, and (2) evaluating task completion success and pinpointing the specific step at which
failure occurs. To tackle these challenges, we introduce two novel components: the World State
ModelMstate and the Curriculum GeneratorMtask. These components jointly support a self-evolving
curriculum paradigm, which facilitates the autonomous generation of increasingly diverse and
challenging tasks.
The self-evolving curriculum paradigm pipeline is structured into P sequential phases. Before
the first phase, a set of initial tasks targeting basic GUI operations is generated (details provided in
Sup. C.1). In each phase, these tasks are executed and step-wise evaluated. The resulting judgments
and descriptions of the exploration trajectories are fed into the Curriculum GeneratorMtask, which
updates a self-maintained software guidebook U. Leveraging this updated guidebook and the
current capabilities of the CUA, the generator then produces more diverse and challenging tasks for
subsequent phases. The following outlines each step of the process in detail:
(1) Task initiation: The initial state of the unfamiliar software is provided, typically in the form of
screenshots of its basic GUI interface. The World State ModelMstate performs dense captioning of
the GUI elements, including button detection and OCR-based recognition. These detailed captions
are passed to the Curriculum Generator Mtask, which generates an initial set of task instructions
I0 ={I (1)
0 ,I (2)
0 ,···} along with an initial software guidebookU0 for the software.
(2) World state judgment: In thep-th phase of Auto Exploration, the Actor Modelπp executes tasks
based on the instructions inIp. Each execution is evaluated by the World State ModelMstate, which
provides feedbackJp ={J (1)
p ,J (2)
p ,···} for each step within the operation trajectory. In addition, it
generates a detailed description of GUI state changes based on captured screenshots, denoted asCp.
(3) Task self-evolving: Based on the outcomesJp andCp, the Curriculum GeneratorMtask produces
a more challenging task set Ip+1 and expands the agent’s knowledge boundary by updating the
software guidebook toUp+1. The detailed prompting process is illustrated in Fig. 8. This iterative
4

update can be formalized as:
Up+1,Ip+1 =Mtask(Up,Ip,Jp,Cp) (1)
Here,Up+1 serves as a more comprehensive software guidebook memory, whileIp+1 represents a
more challenging task set tailored to the current capabilities of the Actor Model πp. Examples of
Ip are provided in Fig. 4, where the Actor Modelπ demonstrates curriculum learning by handling
increasingly complex tasks across different phases p. Illustrations of Up across various software
applications are provided in Sup. J. Comparison with previous methods [39, 38, 56] on task generation
are detailed in Sup.C.2
(4) Autonomous RL Training: Through iterative reinforcement learning, the Actor Model πp is
updated based on its execution of the instruction setIp, guided by evaluation feedbackJp and a set
of action-specific verifiable functionsRverifer. The resulting policyπp+1 is then used as the actor in
the subsequent phase. Further details are provided in Sec. 3.2.
3.2 Reinforcement Learning from Experience
The World State ModelMstate provides step-level reward signals for reinforcement learning. Unlike
previous reward models for CUA [47, 6, 46, 45, 35], ourMstate model takes the entire trajectory of
states and actions,H ={(s0,a 0), (s1,a 1),... }, as input. It classifies each actiona as eitheraF or
aT , whereaF indicates an incorrect action leading to failure or redundant loops, andaT represents a
correct action that contributes to successful progression without redundancy. The curated prompt
used for judgment is depicted in Fig. 7. For historical states that result in aT , we encourage CUA
to reinforce these actions through verifiable rewards defined by a set of functionsRverifer ={rdist}.
Conversely, for states leading toaF , we penalize them using negative KL divergence with adversarial
imitation.
Adversarial Imitation for Failure Action Punishment.To explicitly encourage the policy to diverge
from failure-inducing behaviors, we employ a contrastive log-ratio loss based on a reference failure
actionaF . This objective encourages the policy to sample actionsa that minimize alignment with the
failure actionaF :
LAI(πθ) = Eν

− log πθ(a|s,I )
πref(aF|s,I )

(2)
This formulation serves as an adversarial imitation signal. By maximizing divergence from this
distribution, the agent is trained to explore alternative action distributions that deviate from those
leading to failure, particularly in complex GUI interaction scenarios. Notably, this loss shares a
similar form with DPO [49] but only the negative part.
Verifiable Rewards for Correct Action Encouragement. To more effectively guide the policy
toward correct actionsaT , we adopt Reinforcement Learning with Verifiable Rewards (RLVR) [17,
53], which has recently shown success in enhancing language models on tasks with objectively
verifiable answers, such as mathematics [ 53], and more recently, counting and grounding in the
vision-language domain [33, 54, 37]. After labeling the correct step (s,aT ) using the World State
Model, we apply Group Relative Policy Optimization (GRPO), computing the relative advantage of
each response based on its reward:
A(i) = r(i)− mean({r(j)}G
j=1)
std({r(j)}G
j=1) , i = 1,··· ,G. (3)
As we design distinct reward signals for different action types, we define the reward function between
a predicted actiona and the ground-truth actionaT as:
r(i) =r(a(i),aT ) = I

type(a(i)) = type(aT )

+rdist(a(i),aT ), (4)
where I(·) is the indicator function that returns 1 if the predicted action and ground-truth action are of
the same type, and 0 otherwise. The distance-based reward termrdist(a(i),aT ) is defined according
to the specific action type: for click actions, it is computed based on the normalized L1 distance
between the clicked coordinates; for drag and select actions, it is computed using the Intersection
over Union (IoU) between the predicted and ground-truth bounding boxes; and for type actions, it
5

is determined by the character-level BLEU score between the predicted and ground-truth text. All
rdist rewards are normalized to the range [0, 1] to ensure consistency across different action types. A
comprehensive list ofrdist(a(i),aT ) definitions for various action types is provided in Tab. 8. The
final loss of GRPO is directly adopted from [53]:
LGRPO(πθ) =−E(s,I)∼D,{a(i)}G
i=1∼πref(·|s,I) (5)
"
1
G
GX
i=1
1
|a(i)|
|a(i)|X
t=1
n
min

r(i)
t (θ)A(i), clip(r(i)
t (θ), 1−ϵ, 1 +ϵ)A(i)

−βD (i,t)
KL (πθ∥πref)
o#
,
where ri,t(θ) = πθ(a(i)|s,I )
πθref (a(i)|s,I ) andDi,t
KL(πθ,π ref) = πref(a(i)|s,I )
πθ(a(i)|s,I ) − 1− logπref(a(i)|s,I )
πθ(a(i)|s,I ).
Similar to [53, 17], advantageA is weighted on the whole reasoning token logits to encourage free
form thinking for performing action and planning.
The final training loss is defined as a weighted combination of positive and negative action samples,
i.e., correct actionsaT and incorrect actionsaF :L(π(θ)) =LGRPO +γLAI. We setγ = 0.2 during
training, and the rationale for this choice is discussed in the ablation study presented in Sup. F.
This strategy is shown to be more effective in Sec. 4.2 compared to Generalized Advantage Estimation
(GAE) [52]-based RL methods [47, 6], as the more powerful reward modelMstate provides accurate
step-level reward signals by leveraging the entire episode trajectoryH from a global perspective.
3.3 From Specialist to Generalist.
Achieving a generalist agent capable of operating across multiple software platforms is an ambitious
and valuable goal. We first attempted to train such a generalist directly using the proposed SEAgent
framework across all software environments. However, this approach led to suboptimal performance
compared to specialized agents, as the actor struggled to learn effectively in the multi-software
environment.
We thus introduce a specialist to generalist strategy, as illustrated in Fig. 1. Specifically, we first train
software-specialized agents via SEAgent on individual environments, allowing each to master a spe-
cific application. These specialists are then distilled into a single generalist model through supervised
fine-tuning (SFT) on synthesized successful trajectories. Finally, the generalist is refined via SEAgent
on multiple software. This generalist, now equipped with better reasoning, planning abilities, and
software-specific commonsense, achieves significantly improved performance, outperforming both
the SEAgent via direct general RL and the performance combination of multi-specialists as in Table 2.
4 Experiments
4.1 Benchmark of Reward Model for computer use agent.
Providing CUA agents with reliable reward signals is crucial for enabling self-evolution in agentic
systems, consisting of an actor (CUA) and a judge model, especially when interacting with unfamiliar
software environments. Recent work, AgentRewardBench [35], proposes to evaluate the precision of
reward models by assessing the accuracy of judge predictions on web-based tasks using trajectories
from diverse agents. Building upon AgentRewardBench [35], we further extend the evaluation beyond
web tasks to a broader set of PC software environments. Specifically, we evaluate on all 339 feasible
tasks from OSWorld [68], using rule-based criteria for determining success or failure. Trajectories
are sampled from UI-TARS [ 48] and Gemini-2.5-Pro [ 14], and rule-based evaluation is used as
ground-truth supervision. We then compute the confusion matrix by comparing the predictions of
different reward models against these labels.
The judge strategy in AgentRewardBench [35] relies solely on the final state and the associated action
history. However, it is more natural and reliable for a judge model to consider the entire trajectory
when assessing task success, rather than focusing only on the final state. For example, consider
6

Table 1: Precision and Negative Predictive Value (NPV) on AgentReardBench [ 35] and OS-
World [68] with last screenshot only (LS) or entire process screenshots (ES) as input. World State
Model closes the gap with commercial model supporting full process high resolution screenshots as
input. The co-training with screenshot change description (CD) improves judgment precision.
Model Input
AgentRewardBench OS-World-Full Prof/Office
Precision NPV Precision NPV Precision NPV
GPT-4o [23] LS 68.1 92.3 46.3 88.2 40.5 81.0
ES 72.1 92.2 74.6 95.2 70.4 85.3
Qwen2.5-VL-72B [7] LS 64.5 94.2 41.5 86.9 31.7 78.7
ES 26.2 83.0 26.8 83.0 25.6 76.6
Qwen2.5-VL-7B [7] LS 64.1 90.3 37.3 85.2 31.8 79.0
ES 25.4 83.8 20.0 81.7 23.5 76.0
World State Model (w/o CD) ES 69.1 88.5 71.1 88.4 65.0 81.1
World State Model (w/ CD) ES 71.6 91.2 73.9 90.5 69.3 82.0
the task of booking a flight to London. A final state message such as "Your flight ticket has been
successfully booked." does not confirm whether the correct date and time were selected, which can
lead to compromised judgment accuracy.
However, we observe that current open-sourced LVLMs do not perform well under this more holistic
evaluation strategy. As shown in Fig. 3, feeding additional historical screenshots into Qwen2.5-VL [7]
significantly degrades its Average Precision (AP), diverging notably from GPT-4o [23] on the same
curated prompt detailed in Fig.6. We attribute this performance drop to the insufficient pretraining of
Qwen2.5-VL on long sequences of high-resolution screenshots, which likely pushes it toward the
limits of its 32K context length.
To address this issue, we propose a distilled model based on Qwen2.5-VL-7B, referred to as World
State Model, which conducts step-by-step screenshot analysis to produce final judgments. The
training process for World State Model is detailed in Sup. A.2, using a dataset of 0.86K GPT-4o [23]
generated evaluations on trajectories with dense GUI change descriptions, exclusively from Chrome
within the OSWorld [68] environment. Despite being trained solely on Chrome data, World State
Model exhibits strong generalization to both other professional software in OSWorld and the external
AgentRewardBench [35] benchmark. This demonstrates that the model learns transferable judgment
patterns rather than overfitting to the specifics of a single application, thanks to the diversity and
quality of step-level annotations in the training data.
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
Qwen2.5-VL-72B
Qwen2.5-VL-7B
GPT-4o
GUI-Judge
40
45
50
55
60
65
70
75
Qwen2.5-VL-72B
Qwen2.5-VL-7B
GPT-4o
GUI-Judge
Average Precision
1 2 4 8 all #states (screenshot)
Figure 3: The Average Precision on AgentRe-
wardBench [35], where GUI-Judge exhibits an
improvement in AP as the number of input middle
states increases, showing a similar trend to that of
the closed sourced GPT-4o [23] when compared
with its base model.
We evaluate World State Model and our
full-process screenshot-conditioned strategy on
AgentRewardBench [35], as well as on agent
trajectories from OSWorld [68]. As shown in
Tab. 1 and further analyzed in Fig. 3, World State
Model achieves state-of-the-art performance
among open-sourced models, significantly nar-
rowing the gap with GPT-4o [23]. More impor-
tantly, it exhibits a similar performance trend to
GPT-4o when conditioned on historical screen-
shots. Despite being trained on a relatively
small dataset, World State Model is explicitly
encouraged to capture the sequential dependen-
cies among historical screenshots and to perform
step-by-step reasoning for final judgment. Serv-
ing as our foundation reward model, World State
Model provides reliable, step-level reward sig-
nals that support downstream policy learning. In line with our agentic system design—which
emphasizes the evolution of the actor agent with full open-sourced models—we intentionally avoid
relying on GPT-4o [23] API calls for judgment during training and inference (also due to inefficiency).
More details of World State Model is supplied in Sup.A.
7

Table 2: Success Rate (SR) on OSWorld [68]. SEAgent demonstrates strong performance after
reinforcement learning from experience. In addition to evolving on separate software, a new General
Model achieves better performance after another iteration of SEAgent. *Indicates specialist agents
trained separately for each software with ensembled results. All results are averaged over three runs.
Model VScode GIMP Impress VLC Writer Overall
Human Performance 73.9 73.1 80.9 70.6 73.9 74.5
GPT-4o [23] 4.35 3.85 6.77 16.1 4.35 7.08
GPT-4V [42] 0.00 7.69 2.52 18.3 4.35 6.59
Gemini-Pro-1.5 [60] 0.00 11.5 13.2 6.53 8.71 7.99
Claude3.7 Sonnet [4] 18.8 24.4 10.6 27.5 17.4 19.7
Gemini-Pro-2.5 [14] 21.7 26.9 9.92 25.5 24.6 21.7
UI-TARS-7B-DPO [34] 13.0 23.1 4.26 11.8 4.35 11.3
UI-TARS-72B-DPO [34] 18.8 25.6 6.38 15.7 8.70 15.0
DigiRL [6] (Specialized RL)* 21.7 32.1 12.8 23.5 18.8 21.8
WebRL [47] (Specialized RL)* 27.5 29.5 10.6 25.5 15.9 21.8
SEAgent (Specialized RL)* 37.7 38.5 22.0 33.3 29.0 32.2
DigiRL [6] (General RL) 21.7 35.9 12.1 19.6 15.9 21.0
WebRL [47] (General RL) 20.3 32.5 9.93 21.6 14.5 19.6
SEAgent (General RL) 36.2 39.7 19.9 31.4 26.1 30.6
SEAgent (General SFT) 30.4 37.2 18.4 31.9 20.3 27.9
SEAgent (Specialist-to-Generalist) 40.5 42.3 22.7 35.3 31.8 34.5
4.2 Self evolution of GUI Agents
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
35
40
45
-Type text in the first box.
-Add a new page.
-Delete the existing text box.
-Create a title “GUI RL!” and
put it in the center of the page.
-Draw a green rectangle with
50% transparency.
-Create a title “GUI RL!”
with green background in
the center of the page.
-Create a new file.
-Open settings.
-Open a folder as project.
-Change the style of vscode
to “Light+”
-Install python extension.
Phase 1 Phase 2 Phase 3
-Open the video on desktop.
-Increase the volume.
-Open VLM configurator.
-Save current video to 1.mp4
in desktop folder.
-Stop the current video.
-Add all the music files in
the "My Music" folder to
the playlist and set it to
loop playback.
-Set a breakpoint at line 14
in the current .py script
and start debugging it.
-Open girl.png on the desktop.
-Creat a black box on image.
-Rotate current image.
-Crop the head of the bird
and save it to a new image
named “head.png” onto the
desktop.
-Write the text “RL” at the
center of the opened image.
-Create a new image with a
size of 1600 by 900 pixels.
Phase
P1 P2 P3P0
SR
Figure 4: Self-evolved task instructions and success rate (SR) curves across different software.
Tasks are progressively upgraded by the Curriculum Generator without human intervention, based on
the evolving capabilities of the Actor Model at different training phases.
Models Before Self-Evolution. Our self-evolving system is initialized with three locally deployed
models: UI-TARS-7B-DPO [48] as the Actor Model, World State Model as the step-level reward
model, and Qwen2.5-72B [72] as the Curriculum Generator for task evolution with software guide-
book memory. We conduct experiments on five professional and office-related software applications
from OSWorld [68]. As shown in Tab. 2, the initial actor agent demonstrates limited performance on
these software environments, achieving an average success rate of 11.3% only.
Evolution Process Details. At beginning, we provide World State Model with the initial GUI state
of the novel software. The Curriculum Generator then generates the first software guidebook and
a set of basic tasks (illustrated in Fig.5). This yields an initial instruction set I0, averaging 150.2
instructions, which are executed by the Actor Model. The resulting trajectories are evaluated by
World State Model and parsed into an average of 1361.5 multi-turn conversation pairs (detailed
statistics are in Sup.H). We then perform reinforcement fine-tuning (RFT) following the methodology
described in Sec. 3.2. Training is conducted for 1k iterations on 8 NVIDIA A100 80GB GPUs, with
G = 8, a batch size of 16, and a learning rate of 2× 10−5, scheduled via cosine decay. This evolution
process is repeated iteratively for three phases using the same training configuration.
Specialist Evaluation. For a fair comparison with previous reinforcement learning methods [6, 47],
we adapt their training strategies to the UI-TARS [48] model. Specifically, we initialize the actor
8

agent from UI-TARS-7B-DPO and, instead of providing step-level reward signals, We evaluate its
executed trajectories with binary success or failure outcomes using World State Model. A separate
critic model is also initialized from UI-TARS-7B-DPO, with additional random initialized MLP
layers taking the LLM’s hidden states as input to regress value predictions. This critic is trained to
perform advantage estimation based on Generalized Advantage Estimation (GAE) [ 52]. The loss
functions follow the same configurations as in [6, 47]. Both the critic and the actor agent are trained
iteratively using the same phased reinforcement fine-tuning (RFT) process, where the Curriculum
Generator continually generates new curriculum-style tasks.
As shown in Fig. 4 and Tab. 2, we train separate actor agents for five different software applications.
Our approach, denoted as SEAgent (Specialist), achieves strong performance compared to previous
reinforcement learning methods such as DigiRL [6] and WebRL [47]. We attribute this improvement
to the use of World State Model, which provides fine-grained, step-level reward signals derived from
a comprehensive understanding of the full history of states and actions. This contrasts with previous
approaches that rely on separate critic models—typically initialized from the actor itself—to estimate
advantages from sparse, final success/failure signals. Furthermore, the curriculum of task instructions
generated by the Curriculum Generator, as illustrated in Fig. 4, validates the effectiveness of our
autonomous learning framework. These tasks progress from simple to complex based on the actor’s
evolving capabilities, enabling it to gradually specialize in each target software environment. Based
on the observed evolution curves, we set the number of training phases to three, as performance gains
saturate beyond that point.
From Specialist to Generalist. After training five strong software specialists, we pursue generaliza-
tion using the methodology described in Sec. 3.3. Specifically, we collect task instructions generated
during each specialist’s training phase and use them to prompt the respective specialists for execution.
A total of 3.5K successful trajectories, along with their corresponding reasoning traces, are distilled
into a new base model (UI-TARS-7B [48]) via supervised fine-tuning (SFT). This distilled model is
then further optimized through reinforcement learning (RL) across all five software environments.
As shown in Tab. 2, the resulting generalist model surpasses the performance of the individual
specialist ensemble, demonstrating the effectiveness of a specialization-first strategy for achieving
generalization. By learning from a broad range of software tasks, the generalist improves its reasoning
and decision-making capabilities, acquiring transferable commonsense knowledge across domains.
Table 3: Ablation of different configurations and their cor-
responding VScode success rates on OSWorld [68]. Using
World State Model as the reward model yields significant per-
formance gains. We further compare different training strate-
gies including supervised fine-tuning (behavior cloning),
GRPO, and Adversarial Imitation (AI).
Qwen2.5VL-72B World State Model SFT (BC) GRPO AI VScode SR
13.0
✓ ✓ 10.1
✓ ✓ 11.6
✓ ✓ 23.2
✓ ✓ ✓ 30.4
✓ ✓ 34.8
✓ ✓ ✓ 37.7
Ablation Study of Specialist Train-
ing. In Tab. 3, we present an ab-
lation study on the effectiveness of
various components in our training
pipeline, using the success rate on VS-
Code from OSWorld [68] as the eval-
uation metric. First, we ablate the use
of the World State Model for reward
signal generation. Its high precision
in judging the success or failure of
the actor agent’s actions—compared
to using a base model—is shown to be
essential for effective self-evolution.
In addition to reward quality, reinforcement fine-tuning (RFT) also proves critical. Compared to
direct supervised fine-tuning (behavior cloning), RFT encourages more diverse and exploratory
reasoning patterns under verifiable rewards, enabling more generalized task planning. Finally, incor-
porating adversarial imitation to penalize critical failure-inducing actions allows the CUA to learn
from its mistakes, yielding additional performance gains. This highlights the importance of learning
not only from successful behaviors but also from failure signals.
5 Conclusion
In this work, we introduce SEAgent, an autonomous Computer Use Agent (CUA) exploration system
that learns from its own experience on specific software. Powered by a robust World State Model that
provides step-level reward signals, and a carefully designed reinforcement learning framework that
9

encourages free-form reasoning through trial and error, the CUA is able to evolve into a specialist for
individual software platforms. Furthermore, a specialist-to-generalist training strategy enables the
development of a strong generalist agent capable of operating across multiple software environments.
Given that computer software constitutes a highly regularized virtual world, we believe this work can
inspire future research on agentic systems in both gaming and real world embodied environments.
Limitations and future work. While promising, our work still has several unresolved limitations.
Firstly, our self evolving agent system is bounded by GUI-Judge to provide reliable reward signal
instead of real signal from environment. As its still challenging to learning from sparse reward signal
in complex environment. Secondly, though we tested on relatively complex and novel software like
libreoffice-tools and GIMP. The task is still relatively simple as it only takes a human expert less
than 20 step to accomplish. How to adapt the system to achieve hours-long workflow in even more
challenging software used by real human expert are thus interesting future directions.
