record_id: awesome:ggjy:96fbb64ec010
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2602.04726
fetched_title: SUPPORTING SOFTWARE ENGINEERING TASKS WITH AGENTICAI: DEMONSTRATION ON DOCUMENT RETRIEVAL AND TEST
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:08:31Z

SUPPORTING SOFTWARE ENGINEERING TASKS WITH AGENTICAI:
DEMONSTRATION ON DOCUMENT RETRIEVAL AND TEST
SCENARIO GENERATION
Marian Kica0009-0008-9168-4327
Gratex International
Bratislava, Slovakia
mkica@gratex.com
Lukas Radosky0000-0003-3909-3219
Department of Applied Informatics
Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics
Comenius University Bratislava
Bratislava, Slovakia
lukas.radosky@fmph.uniba.sk
David Slivka0009-0005-7546-3186
Gratex International
Bratislava, Slovakia
dslivka@gratex.com
Karin Kubinova0009-0005-4369-4713
Gratex International
Bratislava, Slovakia
kubinova@gratex.com
Daniel Dovhun0009-0003-7750-299X
Gratex International
Bratislava, Slovakia
ddovhun@gratex.com
Tomas Uhercik0009-0001-2827-7488
Gratex International
Bratislava, Slovakia
tuhercik@gratex.com
Erik Bircak0009-0005-5688-1796
Gratex International
Bratislava, Slovakia
ebircak@gratex.com
Ivan Polasek0000-0001-6004-701X
Department of Applied Informatics
Faculty of Mathematics, Physics and Informatics
Comenius University Bratislava
Bratislava, Slovakia
ivan.polasek@fmph.uniba.sk
February 5, 2026
This is a preprint of a paper that was accepted at theInternational Conference on Artificial Intelligence, Computer,
Data Sciences and Applications (ACDSA 2026).
ABSTRACT
The introduction of large language models ignited great retooling and rethinking of the software
development models. The ensuing response of software engineering research yielded a massive
body of tools and approaches. In this paper, we join the hassle by introducing agentic AI solutions
for two tasks. First, we developed a solution for automatic test scenario generation from a detailed
requirements description. This approach relies on specialized worker agents forming a star topology
with the supervisor agent in the middle. We demonstrate its capabilities on a real-world example.
Second, we developed an agentic AI solution for the document retrieval task in the context of software
engineering documents. Our solution enables performing various use cases on a body of documents
related to the development of a single software, including search, question answering, tracking
changes, and large document summarization. In this case, each use case is handled by a dedicated
LLM-based agent, which performs all subtasks related to the corresponding use case. We conclude
by hinting at the future perspectives of our line of research.
arXiv:2602.04726v1 [cs.SE] 4 Feb 2026

APREPRINT- FEBRUARY5, 2026
Keywordsdocument retrieval, document summarization, question answering, test scenario generation, SDLC, large
language models, LLM, agentic AI
1 Introduction
The emergence of large language models (LLMs) has raised questions of how they might be utilized in different domains,
boosting interest in many research areas. A particularly interesting area is software engineering (SE), where automation
of many tasks, be they repetitive or creative, has long been sought after. While rule-based [ 1, 2, 3] and machine
learning [4, 5, 6] approaches to several tasks have been proposed and implemented in practice, no prior technology has
demonstrated the potential for automation at the scale promised by LLMs. As a result, software development companies
as well as researchers race towards adopting LLM-based solutions with cost-saving expectations.
While SE largely attracts standards, structured documents, and precisely defined processes, it also entails a body of
unstructured or semi-structured natural language (NL) texts, or even semi-formal diagrams [7]. These artifacts are often
found in documents related to requirements, i.e. the specification phase of the software development lifecycle (SDLC).
Some stakeholders prefer informal NL descriptions of requirements, semi-structured descriptions of user scenarios, or
informal mail communication that never gets transformed into formal specifications, yet is expected to be considered
during the design and the implementation phase of the SDLC.
Another challenge of SE arises from the vast corpus of documents or short texts (comments, commit messages, etc.)
typically generated during the SDLC. Navigating these documents might be challenging, especially for stakeholders
who were not involved in their creation and therefore lack the implicit context needed for discovering important
knowledge.
We address two specific tasks stemming from these issues – test scenario generation from NL requirements and SE
document retrieval – by implementing LLM-based agentic AI [8] solutions, which are gaining increasing traction in the
field [9]. We exploit LLMs’ abilities to process unstructured texts [10] in order to generate template-compliant test
scenarios. Moreover, we utilize LLMs for complex tasks related to discovering knowledge in a body of project-specific
SE documents. Both solutions are part of a greater effort towards automating processes within software development
companies.
The primary contribution of this paper lies in presenting concrete agentic AI architectures we implemented for real-
world, day-to-day scenarios in a SE company. We expect that the deployment of these tools will eventually yield a large
volume of feedback and data to reflect upon in further research, resulting both in refining these implementations as well
as employing similar solutions for other tasks.
The remainder of this paper is structured as follows. Section 2 reviews existing literature dealing with both aforemen-
tioned tasks. Section 3 introduces the tasks we dealt with in more detail, as well as the agentic AI architectures we
employed to solve them. Section 4 concludes the contributions of this paper and hints at the steps we intend to take in
the future.
2 Related work
2.1 Test scenarios
Scenario generation with LLMs has been explored in a survey [11], focusing on autonomous driving. Arora et al. [12]
introduced RAGTAG, an LLM-powered approach using retrieval-augmented generation (RAG) to generate test scenarios
based on NL description of functionality. Their experiments involved the GPT-3.5-turbo and the GPT-4 models. Their
approach optionally accepts a brief description of the expected scenario as an additional input, which is needed to
obtain reasonable results. This is a downside in situations where such description is not available, as the generated
scenarios tend to be overly generic without this input.
Rahman et al. [ 13] proposed GeneUS, an LLM-powered tool designed to generate user stories from requirements
documents. Their experiments utilized the GPT-4 model. The setup particularly struggled with the hallucination
phenomenon [14] (also referred to as ’bullshit’ [15]), which they addressed using the Refine and Thought prompting
strategy.
Sami et al. [16] suggested utilizing an existing literature review tool [17] to generate user stories and test scenarios
from functional requirements. The tool uses the GPT-3.5 model. However, no evaluation results were presented, and no
subsequent published research could be identified.
2

APREPRINT- FEBRUARY5, 2026
Yu et al. [18] introduced ScenGen, an agentic AI tool for generating test scenarios based on screenshots of a mobile app
graphical user interface (GUI). In addition to generating the scenarios, the tool also executes them and performs live
monitoring of results, including error logs. The experiments used the GPT-4V model under the hood, with human-based
evaluation proving its excellence over state-of-the-art baselines.
Hasan et al. [19] conducted a survey on the challenges of writing high-level tests with a body of software companies.
They utilized the gathered insights to construct a dataset of pairs use case – high-level test scenario, intended for
fine-tuning models. Having experimented with GPT-4, Gemini, LLaMA 3.1 8B, and Mistral 7B models, human-based
evaluation demonstrated the effectiveness of fine-tuning these models with their dataset, with the LLaMA and the
Mistral models showing particular promise.
Study by Boukhlif et al. [20] hints that the most pressing challenges for LLM-based requirements-oriented tasks are the
interpretability of outputs (usually, employing domain experts is the best approach) and the need for domain-specific
datasets for fine-tuning purposes. This indicates that while automation is highly desirable, quality human-created data
and human-in-the-loop approaches remain essential. Therefore, automation does not relieve the need for experts in the
field.
2.2 Document processing and retrieval
The emergence of LLMs led to their incorporation in many established research areas, including information retrieval
(IR). As in any other area, the feasibility of LLMs is hindered by a number of challenges, e.g. trustworthiness and high
computational costs [21]. Zhai [22] even suggests that instead of performing IR, LLMs in practice might rather use IR
as a tool. Nonetheless, LLMs have been applied to IR in many ways, as documented by Li et al. [23]. They provide an
overview of the evolution of the long-document retrieval task in the era of pre-trained language models and LLMs.
Sun et al. [24] exploit the GPT-4 model for re-ranking. They also try to address the risk of high computational costs [21]
by comparing it with smaller open-source LLMs. However, they find that smaller models achieve significantly worse
results than commercial GPT models. Ma et al. fine-tuned LLaMA models [25] not only as a (point-wise) re-ranker, but
also as a dense retriever, demonstrating the effectiveness of LLMs when processing entire documents. A BERT-based
divide-and-conquer retrieval approach also received some attention, yielding novel additions such as using a linear
combination of the segment relevance scores and the segment correlation matrix to obtain segment scores [ 26] and
effective calculations and query expansion [27]. Uneven distribution of relevance signals in long documents has been
tackled by BERT-based [28] and later by LLaMA-based [28] solutions with focus on identifying the most important
parts of documents. The most relevant document part identification problem was also addressed by SentenceBERT
embeddings combined with an LLM-trained three-layer MLP classifier [ 29]. A tree-based recursive approach has
also been introduced, where an LLM generates summaries of nodes in the tree [ 30]. Another approach operates on
the sentence level, splitting the query and documents into sentences, which are encoded by a SentenceBERT-based
embedder [31]. Among the more lightweight solutions is a plug-and-play approach that divides documents into
segments, each represented by structured summaries [32].
IR research spans a variety of domains and use cases, including application log retrieval [33], patient IR [34], or code
IR [35]. Our goal is to develop a solution tailored to the domain of SDLC documents, e.g. requirements specifications
and service delivery proposals.
3 Our approach
We utilize agentic AI solutions both for the test scenario generation task and for the document retrieval tasks. Our
implementation is based on LangChain1 and LangGraph2 frameworks, using both on-premise and cloud-based LLMs.
Models we currently use are subject to change as further research progresses.
3.1 Test scenario generation
The test scenario generation task in our instance is concerned with generating test scenarios based on a functional
specification document (FSD). The FSD describes the functionality and intended behavior of the specified software and
is typically referred to by software developers during the design and implementation phases of SDLC. The volume of
FSD may span a few dozen pages.
1https://www.langchain.com/langchain
2https://www.langchain.com/langgraph
3

APREPRINT- FEBRUARY5, 2026
FSD is also the basis for creating test scenarios for manual testing. The scenarios must reflect every detail of the FSD.
Manual creation of these scenarios is a time-consuming and costly process. We intend to cut these costs by employing
an LLM-based solution.
Our solution consists of 6 agents, forming a star topology with the supervisor agent in the middle, and the rest of the
agents being specialized workers. Each agent operates within its own context and history due to the limitations of the
context window. To keep the context as small as possible for the supervisor, it only actively works with NL responses
from worker agents. Input and output artifacts, such as the FSD, scenarios in markdown, and other supporting materials,
are stored outside the active context. The architecture of our solution, including the agent order and input-output flow,
is illustrated in Fig. 1.
Get the content
of chapter(s) X.Y XYZ
Write the test scenario
to an excel file
Supervisor AgentThe extracted
chapter(s) content
Retriever Agent
Test Scenario
Writer Agent
Result
of the fact check
Fact Checker
Agent Translator Agent
The test scenario was
written to a file
named <name>.xlsx
Excel Writer Agent
Fact check
the provided
generated
test scenario
Create Test scenario based
on chapter 2.1 Password
Management
Succesfully generated Test
Scenario based on chapter
X.Y. XYZ. You can view the
file at <PATH>.xlsx
IN OUT
Write a test scenarioHere is the test scenario in markdown
Translate this text
Here is the translated text
Fact-checkingloop
Input
Output
Figure 1: Architecture of our agentic AI solution for the test generation task, forming a star topology. The intended
worker invocation order as well as possible feedback loops are also indicated, including the input and output flows. The
’robot’ icon indicates agent components.
Thesupervisoragent prompts the worker agents to perform their tasks, provides them with proper input, and retrieves
their output. Worker agents are not aware of each other; they only communicate with the supervisor agent.
The order in which worker agents should be invoked is given to thesupervisoragent in its prompt. Additionally, it is
also enforced by worker agents verifying the input they are provided. If a worker agent’s input requirements are not
met, the worker agent reports this to the supervisor agent, which reconsiders which agent to prompt next. For example,
the retriever agent expects a FSD on input and will report an error to the supervisor if it receives a test scenario instead.
This serves as a mechanism against the supervisor agent’s mistakes or hallucinations.
The process begins by preprocessing the FSD into plaintext, while images are processed using a vision language model
(VLM). Then theretrieveragent searches the FSD for the user-specified chapter and retrieves its contents. Thetest
scenario writeragent generates the desired test scenario based on the retrieved text. Its prompt specifies the expected
structure and criteria the test scenario has to meet (this is currently hard-coded, might be configurable in the future). The
scenario is generated in a predefined markdown structure. Thefact checkeragent verifies the generated test scenario
against the FSD content originally retrieved by the retriever agent. This mechanism specifically mitigates issues related
to the hallucination phenomenon, as well as other inaccuracies. Based on the fact checker’s assessment, the supervisor
either prompts the test scenario writer to improve its output, or advances the task.
Thetranslatoragent translates the generated scenario into the desired language, as the language of FSD (and therefore
the desired language of generated scenarios) is often dictated by the software company‘s client. Finally, theExcel writer
agent creates an Excel file with the given structure based on the test scenario in markdown. Currently, theExcel writer
agent does not use an LLM, and the Excel structure is hard-coded. In future work, we plan to explore a more modular
approach.
We demonstrate the desired usage of our solution with an example real-world problem instance we encountered. We
only showcase a single chapter of a FSD. Although the original problem instance was in a non-English language, we
demonstrate all artifacts in English to avoid reader confusion.
4

APREPRINT- FEBRUARY5, 2026
Our solution receives FSD on input as a multimodal file, e.g. a Word document. It also requires a simple user prompt,
such as seen in Fig. 2. The relevant FSD excerpt retrieved by the retriever agent is shown in Fig. 3.
The test scenario is then generated, validated, translated, and converted into an Excel file. The output Excel file
corresponding to the prompt from Fig. 2 and FSD in Fig. 3 is shown in Fig. 5. Finally, the user also receives a textual
response, as shown in Fig. 4.
Please create a test scenario based on section Password.
Figure 2: An input user prompt example for our agentic AI solution for the test generation task.
Figure 3: A chapter from a real-world FSD, which was retrieved by the retriever agent. The original image has been
manually edited by translating the texts to English for reader convenience.
The entire process has been completed successfully. The test scenario has been created, fact-checked, translated into
«language», and written to an Excel file. If you need any further assistance or modifications, please let me know!
Figure 4: Textual response of our test scenario generation solution for the user.
5

APREPRINT- FEBRUARY5, 2026
Figure 5: A test scenario generation task output Excel file corresponding to the input prompt from Fig. 2 and the input
FSD from Fig. 3.
6

APREPRINT- FEBRUARY5, 2026
3.2 Document processing
The document processing task in our case consists of several subtasks, enabling more complex real-world scenarios.
A single SDLC typically entails a vast body of documents covering various granularities and aspects of the software.
Moreover, a single document may evolve over time, leading to creation of many different versions of the document.
Searching through documents and their various versions can be a highly time-consuming task, particularly for newcomers
or when the documents are poorly organized, as is often the case.
Get tool
catalogue
Request
App
User
MCPServer
Textual response
Delegator
Search Q&A Trace Reading
Tool
catalogue
Prompt Tool catalogue
Prompt
Response
Invoke tool
Figure 6: Architecture of our agentic AI solution for the document processing task. The ’robot’ icon indicates agent
components.
To reduce costs associated with tasks concerned with the SDLC documents, we created an agentic AI solution.
Architecture of the solution is shown in Fig. 6. The solution provides a common interface (App) for 4 use cases. Each
use case is solved by a dedicated LLM-based agent (Search,Q &A,Trace,Reading). The agents share a Qdrant database
of documents related to the given software. An LLM-drivenDelegatoragent decides which tools (agents) should be
invoked to solve the given task.
3.2.1 General search
Thesearchuse case is concerned with document retrieval based on the given user query. The agent generates and
executes a corresponding database query to obtain the relevant documents. Then the agent analyses the retrieved
document set and filters out the documents it deems irrelevant. Ensuing is the summarization of each document, which
is then formatted according to the given template. The user is then presented with an ordered list of relevant documents,
with each record consisting of a document excerpt, document reference, and document metadata. The document list
is split into two sections by the LLM – the most relevant documents and supplementary materials, i.e. less relevant
documents.
3.2.2 Question answering
TheQ &Ause case provides answers to a user’s question, quoting relevant documents. The first step is to form a
database query and filter out irrelevant documents, similarly to thesearchuse case. Then, each remaining document is
used to answer the user’s question individually. Finally, the individual answers are aggregated into the final answer,
with quotations of the most relevant documents. Note that if the agent decides it is not able to answer the question from
the given base of documents, it will notify the user about this. This is guaranteed if no document is retrieved from the
database.
7

APREPRINT- FEBRUARY5, 2026
3.2.3 Tracking changes
Thetraceuse case enables the user to reasonably observe changes in documents over time. This is particularly useful
to track changes of a functional requirement. Similarly to thesearchuse case, the agent generates database query,
retrieves the yielded documents, and filters out irrelevant ones. For each remaining document, the agent retrieves all of
its versions. Each version of each document is searched for the relevant requirement, forming history of the requirement
across each relevant document. If the requirement is present in different documents, these documents and their versions
are merged, forming a precise history of the requirement, grouped by documents. This history is used as basis for
generating a textual response to the user’s query, which also entails description of the requirement’s evolution over time.
3.2.4 Document reading
Thereadinguse case generates a response to the user query when dealing with particularly long documents that might
exceed the LLM’s context window. The user query is required to precisely identify the document it is concerned with.
The user might ask which chapter contains the given text or request assistance with a more complex task. The agent
retrieves the relevant document by generating a corresponding database query. The retrieved document is then processed
in blocks, i.e. a divide-and-conquer strategy [23] is applied. The agent maintains its notes on the entire document. After
reading a block, it updates its notes, clears its context, and proceeds to the next block. Finally, the notes are used to
generate a textual response to the user query.
4 Conclusion and future work
We presented two concrete LLM-based agentic AI solutions designed for test scenario generation and document retrieval
tasks in the domain of SE. These solutions are currently deployed in a medium-sized SE company, where they are
utilized daily in real-life operational environments.
In addition, we aim to conduct a comprehensive evaluation of our solutions using established benchmark datasets,
comparing their performance against state-of-the-art approaches. This evaluation will not only validate the effectiveness
of our solutions but also highlight areas for further improvement.
To further enhance these solutions, we plan to collect and analyze the usage data and reflect on it when improving these
solutions as well as developing automation systems for other SE tasks. The insights gained from this process, including
lessons learned from addressing minor development challenges, are expected to provide valuable contributions to the
scientific software engineering community.
Acknowledgment
This research and paper was 100% funded by the EU NextGenerationEU through the Recovery and Resilience
Plan for Slovakia under the project "InnovAIte Slovakia, Illuminating Pathways for AI-Driven Breakthroughs" No.
09I02-03-V01-00029.
