record_id: awesome:gloriaameng:57a6127f412a
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2303.17580
fetched_title: HuggingGPT: Solving AI Tasks with ChatGPT and its Friends in Hugging Face
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:08:21Z

HuggingGPT: Solving AI Tasks with ChatGPT and its
Friends in Hugging Face
Yongliang Shen1,2,∗, Kaitao Song2,∗,†, Xu Tan2,
Dongsheng Li2, Weiming Lu1,†, Yueting Zhuang1,†
Zhejiang University1, Microsoft Research Asia2
{syl, luwm, yzhuang}@zju.edu.cn , {kaitaosong, xuta, dongsli}@microsoft.com
https://github.com/microsoft/JARVIS
Abstract
Solving complicated AI tasks with different domains and modalities is a key step
toward artificial general intelligence. While there are numerous AI models avail-
able for various domains and modalities, they cannot handle complicated AI tasks
autonomously. Considering large language models (LLMs) have exhibited excep-
tional abilities in language understanding, generation, interaction, and reasoning,
we advocate that LLMs could act as a controller to manage existing AI models to
solve complicated AI tasks, with language serving as a generic interface to em-
power this. Based on this philosophy, we present HuggingGPT, an LLM-powered
agent that leverages LLMs (e.g., ChatGPT) to connect various AI models in ma-
chine learning communities (e.g., Hugging Face) to solve AI tasks. Specifically,
we use ChatGPT to conduct task planning when receiving a user request, select
models according to their function descriptions available in Hugging Face, execute
each subtask with the selected AI model, and summarize the response according to
the execution results. By leveraging the strong language capability of ChatGPT
and abundant AI models in Hugging Face, HuggingGPT can tackle a wide range
of sophisticated AI tasks spanning different modalities and domains and achieve
impressive results in language, vision, speech, and other challenging tasks, which
paves a new way towards the realization of artificial general intelligence.
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6], such as ChatGPT, have attracted substantial attention
from both academia and industry, due to their remarkable performance on various natural language
processing (NLP) tasks. Based on large-scale pre-training on massive text corpora and reinforcement
learning from human feedback [2], LLMs can exhibit superior capabilities in language understanding,
generation, and reasoning. The powerful capability of LLMs also drives many emergent research
topics (e.g., in-context learning [1, 7, 8], instruction learning [9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14], and chain-of-
thought prompting [15, 16, 17, 18]) to further investigate the huge potential of LLMs, and brings
unlimited possibilities for us for advancing artificial general intelligence.
Despite these great successes, current LLM technologies are still imperfect and confront some urgent
challenges on the way to building an advanced AI system. We discuss them from these aspects: 1)
Limited to the input and output forms of text generation, current LLMs lack the ability to process
complex information such as vision and speech, regardless of their significant achievements in NLP
* The first two authors have equal contributions. This work was done when the first author was an intern at
Microsoft Research Asia.
† Corresponding author.
37th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2023).
arXiv:2303.17580v4 [cs.CL] 3 Dec 2023

lllyasviel/
ControlNet
facebook/
detr-resnet-101
nlpconnet/
vit-gpt2-image-captioning
HuggingGPT
A text can describe the given image: a herd of
giraffes and zebras grazing in a fields. In
addition, there are five detected objects as
giraffe with score 99.9%, zebra with score 99.7%, zebra
with 99.9%, giraffe with score 97.1% and zebra with
score 99.8%. The bounding boxes are shown in the
above image. I performed image classification, object
detection and image caption on this image. Combining
the predictions of nlpconnet/vit-gpt2-image-
captioning, facebook/detr-resnet-101 and
google/vit models, I get the results for you.
Response
Generation
Task
Planing
Ⅰ
Ⅳ
Task ExecutionⅢ
Prediction
Prediction
Model
Selection
Ⅱ
LLM as Controller HuggingFace
Can you describe this picture and count how
many objects in the picture?
Figure 1: Language serves as an interface for LLMs (e.g., ChatGPT) to connect numerous AI models
(e.g., those in Hugging Face) for solving complicated AI tasks. In this concept, an LLM acts as a
controller, managing and organizing the cooperation of expert models. The LLM first plans a list of
tasks based on the user request and then assigns expert models to each task. After the experts execute
the tasks, the LLM collects the results and responds to the user.
tasks; 2) In real-world scenarios, some complex tasks are usually composed of multiple sub-tasks, and
thus require the scheduling and cooperation of multiple models, which are also beyond the capability
of language models; 3) For some challenging tasks, LLMs demonstrate excellent results in zero-shot
or few-shot settings, but they are still weaker than some experts (e.g., fine-tuned models). How to
address these issues could be the critical step for LLMs toward artificial general intelligence.
In this paper, we point out that in order to handle complicated AI tasks, LLMs should be able to
coordinate with external models to harness their powers. Hence, the pivotal question is how to choose
suitable middleware to bridge the connections between LLMs and AI models. To tackle this issue,
we notice that each AI model can be described in the form of language by summarizing its function.
Therefore, we introduce a concept: “Language as a generic interface for LLMs to collaborate with
AI models”. In other words, by incorporating these model descriptions into prompts, LLMs can be
considered as the brain to manage AI models such as planning, scheduling, and cooperation. As a
result, this strategy empowers LLMs to invoke external models for solving AI tasks. However, when
it comes to integrating multiple AI models into LLMs, another challenge emerges: solving numerous
AI tasks needs collecting a large number of high-quality model descriptions, which in turn requires
heavy prompt engineering. Coincidentally, we notice that some public ML communities usually offer
a wide range of applicable models with well-defined model descriptions for solving specific AI tasks
such as language, vision, and speech. These observations bring us some inspiration: Can we link
LLMs (e.g., ChatGPT) with public ML communities (e.g., GitHub, Hugging Face 1, etc) for solving
complex AI tasks via a language-based interface?
In this paper, we propose an LLM-powered agent named HuggingGPT to autonomously tackle a
wide range of complex AI tasks, which connects LLMs (i.e., ChatGPT) and the ML community (i.e.,
Hugging Face) and can process inputs from different modalities. More specifically, the LLM acts as
a brain: on one hand, it disassembles tasks based on user requests, and on the other hand, assigns
suitable models to the tasks according to the model description. By executing models and integrating
results in the planned tasks, HuggingGPT can autonomously fulfill complex user requests. The whole
process of HuggingGPT, illustrated in Figure 1, can be divided into four stages:
• Task Planning: Using ChatGPT to analyze the requests of users to understand their intention, and
disassemble them into possible solvable tasks.
• Model Selection: To solve the planned tasks, ChatGPT selects expert models that are hosted on
Hugging Face based on model descriptions.
• Task Execution: Invoke and execute each selected model, and return the results to ChatGPT.
1https://huggingface.co/models
2

Please generate an image where a girl is reading a book, and her pose is the same as the boy in the image
example.jpg, then please describe the new image with your voice.
Stage #1: Task Planning Stage #2: Model Selection
Stage #3: Task Execution Stage #4: Response Generation
[Image-1] = example.jpg [Image-2] = <resource-1> [Image-3] = <resource-2> [Image-4] [Audio-1]
task: image-to-text
args:
image: <resource-2>
task: text-to-speech
args:
text: <resource-5>
task: image-class.
args:
image: <resource-2>
task: object-det.
args:
image: <resource-2>
task: pose-to-image
args:
text: a reading girl
image: <resource-1>
task: pose-det.
args:
image: example.jpg
[Text-1] = <resource-5>
a girl sitting on a bed
reading a book
Response
Request
hustvl/yolos-tiny
facebook/detr-resnet-101
TahaDouaji/detr-doc-table-detection
task: pose-det.
task: image-class.
task: object-det.
args:
image: <resource-2>
Query
Model Cards in HuggingFace
In-context task-model assignment:
task, args, model
task, args, model
obj-det. <resource-2>
facebook/detr-resnet-101
Bounding boxes
with probabilitiesHuggingFace Endpoint
(facebook/detr-resnet-101)
Local Endpoint
(facebook/detr-resnet-101)
Predictions
The image you gave me is of "boy". The first thing I did was use OpenCV's openpose model to analyze the pose of the boy in the image. I
fed that image, specifically located at [Image-1], into the model to get an output image of the pose, located at [Image-2]. Then I take that
pose and generate a new image, located at [Image-3], using lllyasviel/sd-controlnet-openpose and the instruction "a girl is reading". Next, I
ran object detection on the image generated in the previous step, to get predictions of the objects present in the image, including the box
location. These predictions were run through the facebook/detr-resnet-101 model. The box was drawn on the image, which is located at
[Image-4]. Then, I used the predictions of a image classification model google/vit-base-patch16-224 and a image caption model a
nlpconnect/vit-gpt2-image-captionin model to generate the caption for newly generated image. It generated text: "a girl sitting on a bed
reading a book". Lastly, I ran the facebook/fastspeech2-en-ljspeech model to convert the generated text into audio, located at [Audio-1].
Summary
[T4] object-det.
facebook/detr-resnet
[bounding box]
[T5] image-to-text
nlpconnect/vit-gpt2
“a girl sitting on ...”
[T6] text-to-speech
facebook/fastspeech
[audio-1]
[T1] pose-det.
openpose
[image-2]
[T2] pose-to-image
lym/sd-ctl-pose
[image-3]
[T3] image-class.
google/vit
[classes with prob]
task dependency
Hybrid Endpoints
[T1] [T3] [T5]
[T2]
[T4] [T6]
Figure 2: Overview of HuggingGPT. With an LLM (e.g., ChatGPT) as the core controller and
the expert models as the executors, the workflow of HuggingGPT consists of four stages: 1) Task
planning: LLM parses the user request into a task list and determines the execution order and
resource dependencies among tasks; 2) Model selection: LLM assigns appropriate models to tasks
based on the description of expert models on Hugging Face; 3) Task execution: Expert models on
hybrid endpoints execute the assigned tasks; 4) Response generation: LLM integrates the inference
results of experts and generates a summary of workflow logs to respond to the user.
• Response Generation: Finally, ChatGPT is utilized to integrate the predictions from all models
and generate responses for users.
Benefiting from such a design, HuggingGPT can automatically generate plans from user requests and
use external models, enabling it to integrate multimodal perceptual capabilities and tackle various
complex AI tasks. More notably, this pipeline allows HuggingGPT to continually absorb the powers
from task-specific experts, facilitating the growth and scalability of AI capabilities.
Overall, our contributions can be summarized as follows:
1. To complement the advantages of large language models and expert models, we propose Hug-
gingGPT with an inter-model cooperation protocol. HuggingGPT applies LLMs as the brain for
planning and decision, and automatically invokes and executes expert models for each specific
task, providing a new way for designing general AI solutions.
3

2. By integrating the Hugging Face hub with numerous task-specific models around ChatGPT,
HuggingGPT is able to tackle generalized AI tasks covering multiple modalities and domains.
Through the open collaboration of models, HuggingGPT can provide users with multimodal and
reliable conversation services.
3. We point out the importance of task planning and model selection in HuggingGPT (and au-
tonomous agents), and formulate some experimental evaluations for measuring the capability of
LLMs in planning and model selection.
4. Extensive experiments on multiple challenging AI tasks across language, vision, speech, and
cross-modality demonstrate the capability and huge potential of HuggingGPT in understanding
and solving complex tasks from multiple modalities and domains.
2 Related Works
In recent years, the field of natural language processing (NLP) has been revolutionized by the
emergence of large language models (LLMs) [1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 19, 6], exemplified by models such as
GPT-3 [1], GPT-4 [20], PaLM [3], and LLaMa [6]. LLMs have demonstrated impressive capabilities
in zero-shot and few-shot tasks, as well as more complex tasks such as mathematical problems and
commonsense reasoning, due to their massive corpus and intensive training computation. To extend
the scope of large language models (LLMs) beyond text generation, contemporary research can be
divided into two branches: 1) Some works have devised unified multimodal language models for
solving various AI tasks [21, 22, 23]. For example, Flamingo [21] combines frozen pre-trained vision
and language models for perception and reasoning. BLIP-2 [22] utilizes a Q-former to harmonize
linguistic and visual semantics, and Kosmos-1 [ 23] incorporates visual input into text sequences
to amalgamate linguistic and visual inputs. 2) Recently, some researchers started to investigate the
integration of using tools or models in LLMs [ 24, 25, 26, 27, 28]. Toolformer [24] is the pioneering
work to introduce external API tags within text sequences, facilitating the ability of LLMs to access
external tools. Consequently, numerous works have expanded LLMs to encompass the visual modality.
Visual ChatGPT [26] fuses visual foundation models, such as BLIP [29] and ControlNet [30], with
LLMs. Visual Programming [31] and ViperGPT [25] apply LLMs to visual objects by employing
programming languages, parsing visual queries into interpretable steps expressed as Python code.
More discussions about related works are included in Appendix B.
Distinct from these approaches, HuggingGPT advances towards more general AI capabilities in
the following aspects: 1) HuggingGPT uses the LLM as the controller to route user requests to
expert models, effectively combining the language comprehension capabilities of the LLM with the
expertise of other expert models; 2) The mechanism of HuggingGPT allows it to address tasks in any
modality or any domain by organizing cooperation among models through the LLM. Benefiting from
the design of task planning in HuggingGPT, our system can automatically and effectively generate
task procedures and solve more complex problems; 3) HuggingGPT offers a more flexible approach
to model selection, which assigns and orchestrates tasks based on model descriptions. By providing
only the model descriptions, HuggingGPT can continuously and conveniently integrate diverse expert
models from AI communities, without altering any structure or prompt settings. This open and
continuous manner brings us one step closer to realizing artificial general intelligence.
3 HuggingGPT
HuggingGPT is a collaborative system for solving AI tasks, composed of a large language model
(LLM) and numerous expert models from ML communities. Its workflow includes four stages: task
planning, model selection, task execution, and response generation, as shown in Figure 2. Given a
user request, our HuggingGPT, which adopts an LLM as the controller, will automatically deploy the
whole workflow, thereby coordinating and executing the expert models to fulfill the target. Table 1
presents the detailed prompt design in our HuggingGPT. In the following subsections, we will
introduce the design of each stage.
3.1 Task Planning
Generally, in real-world scenarios, user requests usually encompass some intricate intentions and thus
need to orchestrate multiple sub-tasks to fulfill the target. Therefore, we formulate task planning
4

Task Planning
Prompt
#1 Task Planning Stage - The AI assistant performs task parsing on user input, generating a list
of tasks with the following format: [{"task": task, "id", task_id, "dep": dependency_task_ids,
"args": {"text": text, "image": URL, "audio": URL, "video": URL}}]. The "dep" field
denotes the id of the previous task which generates a new resource upon which the current task
relies. The tag "<resource>-task_id" represents the generated text, image, audio, or video from
the dependency task with the corresponding task_id. The task must be selected from the following
options: {{ Available Task List }}. Please note that there exists a logical connections and order
between the tasks. In case the user input cannot be parsed, an empty JSON response should be
provided. Here are several cases for your reference: {{ Demonstrations }}. To assist with task
planning, the chat history is available as {{ Chat Logs }}, where you can trace the user-mentioned
resources and incorporate them into the task planning stage.
Demonstrations
Can you tell me how many
objects in e1.jpg?
[{"task": "object-detection", "id": 0, "dep": [-1], "args": {"im
age": "e1.jpg" }}]
In e2.jpg, what’s the animal
and what’s it doing?
[{"task": "image-to-text", "id": 0, "dep":[-1], "args": {"im
age": "e2.jpg" }}, {"task":"image-cls", "id": 1, "dep": [-1],
"args": {"image": "e2.jpg" }}, {"task":"object-detection", "id":
2, "dep": [-1], "args": {"image": "e2.jpg" }}, {"task": "vi-
sual-quesrion-answering", "id": 3, "dep":[-1], "args": {"text":
"what’s the animal doing?", "image": "e2.jpg" }}]
First generate a HED image
of e3.jpg, then based on the
HED image and a text “a
girl reading a book”, create
a new image as a response.
[{"task": "pose-detection", "id": 0, "dep": [-1], "args": {"im
age": "e3.jpg" }}, {"task": "pose-text-to-image", "id": 1, "dep":
[0], "args": {"text": "a girl reading a book", "image": "<re-
source>-0" }}]
Model Selection
Prompt
#2 Model Selection Stage - Given the user request and the call command, the AI assistant helps the
user to select a suitable model from a list of models to process the user request. The AI assistant
merely outputs the model id of the most appropriate model. The output must be in a strict JSON
format: {"id": "id", "reason": "your detail reason for the choice"}. We have a list of models for
you to choose from {{ Candidate Models }}. Please select one model from the list.
Candidate Models
{"model_id": model id #1, "metadata": meta-info #1, "description": description of model #1}
{"model_id": model id #2, "metadata": meta-info #2, "description": description of model #2}
··· ··· ···
{"model_id": model id #K, "metadata": meta-info #K, "description": description of model #K}
Response Generation
Prompt
#4 Response Generation Stage - With the input and the inference results, the AI assistant needs to
describe the process and results. The previous stages can be formed as - User Input: {{ User Input
}}, Task Planning: {{ Tasks }}, Model Selection: {{ Model Assignment }}, Task Execution: {{
Predictions }}. You must first answer the user’s request in a straightforward manner. Then describe
the task process and show your analysis and model inference results to the user in the first person.
If inference results contain a file path, must tell the user the complete file path. If there is nothing in
the results, please tell me you can’t make it.
Table 1: The details of the prompt design in HuggingGPT. In the prompts, we set some injectable
slots such as {{ Demonstrations }} and {{ Candidate Models }}. These slots are uniformly replaced
with the corresponding text before being fed into the LLM.
as the first stage of HuggingGPT, which aims to use LLM to analyze the user request and then
decompose it into a collection of structured tasks. Moreover, we require the LLM to determine
dependencies and execution orders for these decomposed tasks, to build their connections. To enhance
the efficacy of task planning in LLMs, HuggingGPT employs a prompt design, which consists of
specification-based instruction and demonstration-based parsing. We introduce these details in the
following paragraphs.
Specification-based Instruction To better represent the expected tasks of user requests and use
them in the subsequent stages, we expect the LLM to parse tasks by adhering to specific specifications
(e.g., JSON format ). Therefore, we design a standardized template for tasks and instruct the LLM to
5

conduct task parsing through slot filing. As shown in Table 1, the task parsing template comprises four
slots ("task", "id", "dep", and "args") to represent the task name, unique identifier, dependencies
and arguments. Additional details for each slot can be found in the template description (see the
Appendix A.1.1). By adhering to these task specifications, HuggingGPT can automatically employ
the LLM to analyze user requests and parse tasks accordingly.
Demonstration-based Parsing To better understand the intention and criteria for task planning,
HuggingGPT incorporates multiple demonstrations in the prompt. Each demonstration consists of a
user request and its corresponding output, which represents the expected sequence of parsed tasks.
By incorporating dependencies among tasks, these demonstrations aid HuggingGPT in understanding
the logical connections between tasks, facilitating accurate determination of execution order and
identification of resource dependencies. The details of our demonstrations is presented in Table 1.
Furthermore, to support more complex scenarios (e.g., multi-turn dialogues), we include chat logs in
the prompt by appending the following instruction: “To assist with task planning, the chat history
is available as {{ Chat Logs }}, where you can trace the user-mentioned resources and incorporate
them into the task planning.”. Here {{ Chat Logs }} represents the previous chat logs. This design
allows HuggingGPT to better manage context and respond to user requests in multi-turn dialogues.
3.2 Model Selection
Following task planning, HuggingGPT proceeds to the task of matching tasks with models, i.e.,
selecting the most appropriate model for each task in the parsed task list. To this end, we use model
descriptions as the language interface to connect each model. More specifically, we first gather the
descriptions of expert models from the ML community (e.g., Hugging Face) and then employ a
dynamic in-context task-model assignment mechanism to choose models for the tasks. This strategy
enables incremental model access (simply providing the description of the expert models) and can be
more open and flexible to use ML communities. More details are introduced in the next paragraph.
In-context Task-model Assignment We formulate the task-model assignment as a single-choice
problem, where available models are presented as options within a given context. Generally, based
on the provided user instruction and task information in the prompt, HuggingGPT is able to select the
most appropriate model for each parsed task. However, due to the limits of maximum context length,
it is not feasible to encompass the information of all relevant models within one prompt. To mitigate
this issue, we first filter out models based on their task type to select the ones that match the current
task. Among these selected models, we rank them based on the number of downloads 2 on Hugging
Face and then select the top-K models as the candidates. This strategy can substantially reduce the
token usage in the prompt and effectively select the appropriate models for each task.
3.3 Task Execution
Once a specific model is assigned to a parsed task, the next step is to execute the task (i.e., perform
model inference). In this stage, HuggingGPT will automatically feed these task arguments into the
models, execute these models to obtain the inference results, and then send them back to the LLM.
It is necessary to emphasize the issue of resource dependencies at this stage. Since the outputs of
the prerequisite tasks are dynamically produced, HuggingGPT also needs to dynamically specify
the dependent resources for the task before launching it. Therefore, it is challenging to build the
connections between tasks with resource dependencies at this stage.
Resource Dependency To address this issue, we use a unique symbol, “<resource>”, to main-
tain resource dependencies. Specifically, HuggingGPT identifies the resources generated by the
prerequisite task as <resource>-task_id, where task_id is the id of the prerequisite task. During
the task planning stage, if some tasks are dependent on the outputs of previously executed tasks
(e.g., task_id), HuggingGPT sets this symbol (i.e., <resource>-task_id) to the corresponding
resource subfield in the arguments. Then in the task execution stage, HuggingGPT dynamically
replaces this symbol with the resource generated by the prerequisite task. As a result, this strategy
empowers HuggingGPT to efficiently handle resource dependencies during task execution.
2To some extent, we think the downloads can reflect the popularity and quality of the model.
6

Task Type Diagram Example Metrics
Single Task
Task 1 Show me a funny image of
a cat
Precision, Recall, F1,
Accuracy
Sequential Task
Task 1 Task 2 Task 3 Replace the cat with a dog
in example.jpg
Precision, Recall, F1
Edit Distance
Graph Task
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
Task 4
Task 5
Task 6
Given a collection of image
A: a.jpg, B: b.jpg, C: c.jpg,
please tell me which image
is more like image B in
terms of semantic, A or C?
Precision, Recall, F1
GPT-4 Score
Table 2: Evaluation for task planning in different task types.
Furthermore, for the remaining tasks without any resource dependencies, we will execute these tasks
directly in parallel to further improve inference efficiency. This means that multiple tasks can be
executed simultaneously if they meet the prerequisite dependencies. Additionally, we offer a hybrid
inference endpoint to deploy these models for speedup and computational stability. For more details,
please refer to Appendix A.1.3.
3.4 Response Generation
After all task executions are completed, HuggingGPT needs to generate the final responses. As
shown in Table 1, HuggingGPT integrates all the information from the previous three stages (task
planning, model selection, and task execution) into a concise summary in this stage, including the list
of planned tasks, the selected models for the tasks, and the inference results of the models.
Most important among them are the inference results, which are the key points for HuggingGPT
to make the final decisions. These inference results are presented in a structured format, such as
bounding boxes with detection probabilities in the object detection model, answer distributions in
the question-answering model, etc. HuggingGPT allows LLM to receive these structured inference
results as input and generate responses in the form of friendly human language. Moreover, instead
of simply aggregating the results, LLM generates responses that actively respond to user requests,
providing a reliable decision with a confidence level.
4 Experiments
4.1 Settings
In our experiments, we employed the gpt-3.5-turbo, text-davinci-003 and gpt-4 variants of
the GPT models as the main LLMs, which are publicly accessible through the OpenAI API 3. To
enable more stable outputs of LLM, we set the decoding temperature to 0. In addition, to regulate
the LLM output to satisfy the expected format (e.g., JSON format), we set the logit_bias to 0.2
on the format constraints (e.g., “ {” and “}”). We provide detailed prompts designed for the task
planning, model selection, and response generation stages in Table 1, where {{variable}} indicates
the slot which needs to be populated with the corresponding text before being fed into the LLM.
4.2 Qualitative Results
Figure 1 and Figure 2 have shown two demonstrations of HuggingGPT. In Figure 1, the user re-
quest consists of two sub-tasks: describing the image and object counting. In response to the
request, HuggingGPT planned three tasks: image classification, image captioning, and object de-
tection, and launched the google/vit [32], nlpconnet/vit-gpt2-image-captioning [33], and
facebook/detr-resnet-101 [34] models, respectively. Finally, HuggingGPT integrated the re-
sults of the model inference and generated responses (describing the image and providing the count
of contained objects) to the user.
3https://platform.openai.com/
7

A more detailed example is shown in Figure 2. In this case, the user’s request included three tasks:
detecting the pose of a person in an example image, generating a new image based on that pose and
specified text, and creating a speech describing the image. HuggingGPT parsed these into six tasks,
including pose detection, text-to-image conditional on pose, object detection, image classification,
image captioning, and text-to-speech. We observed that HuggingGPT can correctly orchestrate
the execution order and resource dependencies among tasks. For instance, the pose conditional
text-to-image task had to follow pose detection and use its output as input. After this, HuggingGPT
selected the appropriate model for each task and synthesized the results of the model execution into a
final response. For more demonstrations, please refer to the Appendix A.3.
4.3 Quantitative Evaluation
LLM Acc ↑ Pre↑ Recall↑ F1↑
Alpaca-7b 6.48 35.60 6.64 4.88
Vicuna-7b 23.86 45.51 26.51 29.44
GPT-3.5 52.62 62.12 52.62 54.45
Table 3: Evaluation for the single task. “Acc”
and “Pre” represents Accuracy and Precision.
In HuggingGPT, task planning plays a pivotal role
in the whole workflow, since it determines which
tasks will be executed in the subsequent pipeline.
Therefore, we deem that the quality of task plan-
ning can be utilized to measure the capability of
LLMs as a controller in HuggingGPT. For this
purpose, we conduct quantitative evaluations to
measure the capability of LLMs. Here we simpli-
fied the evaluation by only considering the task
type, without its associated arguments. To better conduct evaluations on task planning, we group
tasks into three distinct categories (see Table 2) and formulate different metrics for them:
• Single Task refers to a request that involves only one task. We consider the planning to be correct
if and only if the task name (i.e., "task") and the predicted label are identically equal. In this
context, we utilize F1 and accuracy as the evaluation metrics.
• Sequential Task indicates that the user’s request can be decomposed into a sequence of multiple
sub-tasks. In this case, we employ F1 and normalized Edit Distance [35] as the evaluation metrics.
• Graph Task indicates that user requests can be decomposed into directed acyclic graphs. Consider-
ing the possibility of multiple planning topologies within graph tasks, relying solely on the F1-score
is not enough to reflect the LLM capability in planning. To address this, following Vicuna [36], we
employed GPT-4 as a critic to evaluate the correctness of the planning. The accuracy is obtained by
evaluating the judgment of GPT-4, referred to as the GPT-4 Score. Detailed information about the
GPT-4 Score can be found in Appendix A.1.5.
LLM ED ↓ Pre↑ Recall↑ F1↑
Alpaca-7b 0.83 22.27 23.35 22.80
Vicuna-7b 0.80 19.15 28.45 22.89
GPT-3.5 0.54 61.09 45.15 51.92
Table 4: Evaluation for the sequential task. “ED”
means Edit Distance.
Dataset To conduct our evaluation, we invite
some annotators to submit some requests. We col-
lect these data as the evaluation dataset. We use
GPT-4 to generate task planning as the pseudo
labels, which cover single, sequential, and graph
tasks. Furthermore, we invite some expert anno-
tators to label task planning for some complex
requests (46 examples) as a high-quality human-
annotated dataset. We also plan to improve the
quality and quantity of this dataset to further assist in evaluating the LLM’s planning capabilities,
which remains a future work. More details about this dataset are in Appendix A.2. Using this dataset,
we conduct experimental evaluations on various LLMs, including Alpaca-7b [37], Vicuna-7b [36],
and GPT models, for task planning.
LLM GPT-4 Score ↑ Pre↑ Recall↑ F1↑
Alpaca-7b 13.14 16.18 28.33 20.59
Vicuna-7b 19.17 13.97 28.08 18.66
GPT-3.5 50.48 54.90 49.23 51.91
Table 5: Evaluation for the graph task.
Performance Tables 3, 4 and 5 show
the planning capabilities of Hugging-
GPT on the three categories of GPT-4
annotated datasets, respectively. We ob-
served that GPT-3.5 exhibits more promi-
nent planning capabilities, outperform-
ing the open-source LLMs Alpaca-7b
and Vicuna-7b in terms of all types of
8

user requests. Specifically, in more complex tasks (e.g., sequential and graph tasks), GPT-3.5 has
shown absolute predominance over other LLMs. These results also demonstrate the evaluation of task
planning can reflect the capability of LLMs as a controller. Therefore, we believe that developing
technologies to improve the ability of LLMs in task planning is very important, and we leave it as a
future research direction.
LLM Sequential Task Graph Task
Acc↑ ED↓ Acc↑ F1↑
Alpaca-7b 0 0.96 4.17 4.17
Vicuna-7b 7.45 0.89 10.12 7.84
GPT-3.5 18.18 0.76 20.83 16.45
GPT-4 41.36 0.61 58.33 49.28
Table 6: Evaluation on the human-annotated dataset.
Furthermore, we conduct experiments on the
high-quality human-annotated dataset to ob-
tain a more precise evaluation. Table 6 reports
the comparisons on the human-annotated
dataset. These results align with the afore-
mentioned conclusion, highlighting that more
powerful LLMs demonstrate better perfor-
mance in task planning. Moreover, we com-
pare the results between human annotations
and GPT-4 annotations. We find that even
though GPT-4 outperforms other LLMs, there
still remains a substantial gap when compared with human annotations. These observations further
underscore the importance of enhancing the planning capabilities of LLMs.
4.4 Ablation Study
Demo Variety
(# task types) LLM Single Task Sequencial Task Graph Task
Acc↑ F1↑ ED (%)↓ F1↑ F1↑
2 GPT-3.5 43.31 48.29 71.27 32.15 43.42
GPT-4 65.59 67.08 47.17 55.13 53.96
6 GPT-3.5 51.31 51.81 60.81 43.19 58.51
GPT-4 66.83 68.14 42.20 58.18 64.34
10 GPT-3.5 52.83 53.70 56.52 47.03 64.24
GPT-4 67.52 71.05 39.32 60.80 66.90
Table 7: Evaluation of task planning in terms of the variety of demonstrations. We refer to the variety
of demonstrations as the number of different task types involved in the demonstrations.
0 1 2 3 4 5
Number of Shots
30
40
50
60
70Performance (%)
Single T ask
Metric
Accuracy
F1-score
LLM
GPT-3.5
GPT-4
0 1 2 3 4 5
Number of Shots
30
40
50
60
70
Sequential T ask
Metric
ED
F1-score
LLM
GPT-3.5
GPT-4
0 1 2 3 4 5
Number of Shots
30
40
50
60
Graph T ask
LLM
GPT-3.5
GPT-4
Metric
F1-score
Figure 3: Evaluation of task planning with different numbers of demonstrations.
As previously mentioned in our default setting, we apply few-shot demonstrations to enhance the
capability of LLMs in understanding user intent and parsing task sequences. To better investigate
the effect of demonstrations on our framework, we conducted a series of ablation studies from two
perspectives: the number of demonstrations and the variety of demonstrations. Table 7 reports
the planning results under the different variety of demonstrations. We observe that increasing the
variety among demonstrations can moderately improve the performance of LLMs in conduct planning.
Moreover, Figure 3 illustrates the results of task planning with different number of demonstrations.
We can find that adding some demonstrations can slightly improve model performance but this
improvement will be limited when the number is over 4 demonstrations. In the future, we will
continue to explore more elements that can improve the capability of LLMs at different stages.
9

LLM Task Planning Model Selection Response
Passing Rate↑ Rationality↑ Passing Rate↑ Rationality↑ Success Rate↑
Alpaca-13b 51.04 32.17 - - 6.92
Vicuna-13b 79.41 58.41 - - 15.64
GPT-3.5 91.22 78.47 93.89 84.29 63.08
Table 8: Human Evaluation on different LLMs. We report two metrics, passing rate (%) and rationality
(%), in the task planning and model selection stages and report a straightforward success rate (%) to
evaluate whether the request raised by the user is finally resolved.
4.5 Human Evaluation
In addition to objective evaluations, we also invite human experts to conduct a subjective evaluation
in our experiments. We collected 130 diverse requests to evaluate the performance of HuggingGPT at
various stages, including task planning, model selection, and final response generation. We designed
three evaluation metrics, namely passing rate, rationality, and success rate. The definitions of each
metric can be found in Appendix A.1.6. The results are reported in Table 8. From Table 8, we
can observe similar conclusions that GPT-3.5 can significantly outperform open-source LLMs like
Alpaca-13b and Vicuna-13b by a large margin across different stages, from task planning to response
generation stages. These results indicate that our objective evaluations are aligned with human
evaluation and further demonstrate the necessity of a powerful LLM as a controller in the framework
of autonomous agents.
5 Limitations
HuggingGPT has presented a new paradigm for designing AI solutions, but we want to highlight
that there still remain some limitations or improvement spaces: 1) Planning in HuggingGPT heavily
relies on the capability of LLM. Consequently, we cannot ensure that the generated plan will always
be feasible and optimal. Therefore, it is crucial to explore ways to optimize the LLM in order
to enhance its planning abilities; 2) Efficiency poses a common challenge in our framework. To
build such a collaborative system (i.e., HuggingGPT) with task automation, it heavily relies on a
powerful controller (e.g., ChatGPT). However, HuggingGPT requires multiple interactions with
LLMs throughout the whole workflow and thus brings increasing time costs for generating the
response; 3) Token Lengths is another common problem when using LLM, since the maximum
token length is always limited. Although some works have extended the maximum length to 32K,
it is still insatiable for us if we want to connect numerous models. Therefore, how to briefly and
effectively summarize model descriptions is also worthy of exploration; 4) Instability is mainly
caused because LLMs are usually uncontrollable. Although LLM is skilled in generation, it still
possibly fails to conform to instructions or give incorrect answers during the prediction, leading to
exceptions in the program workflow. How to reduce these uncertainties during inference should be
considered in designing systems.
6 Conclusion
In this paper, we propose a system named HuggingGPT to solve AI tasks, with language as the
interface to connect LLMs with AI models. The principle of our system is that an LLM can be viewed
as a controller to manage AI models, and can utilize models from ML communities like Hugging
Face to automatically solve different requests of users. By exploiting the advantages of LLMs in
understanding and reasoning, HuggingGPT can dissect the intent of users and decompose it into
multiple sub-tasks. And then, based on expert model descriptions, HuggingGPT is able to assign
the most suitable models for each task and integrate results from different models to generate the
final response. By utilizing the ability of numerous AI models from machine learning communities,
HuggingGPT demonstrates immense potential in solving challenging AI tasks, thereby paving a new
pathway towards achieving artificial general intelligence.
10

Acknowledgement
We appreciate the support of the Hugging Face team to help us in improving our GitHub project and
web demo. Besides, we also appreciate the contributions of Bei Li, Kai Shen, Meiqi Chen, Qingyao
Guo, Yichong Leng, Yuancheng Wang, Dingyao Yu for the data labeling and Wenqi Zhang, Wen Wang,
Zeqi Tan for paper revision.
This work is partly supported by the Fundamental Research Funds for the Central Universities (No.
226-2023-00060), Key Research and Development Program of Zhejiang Province (No. 2023C01152),
National Key Research and Development Project of China (No. 2018AAA0101900), and MOE
Engineering Research Center of Digital Library.
