record_id: openreview:bGtmGTbmaz
source_used: openreview_pdf
fetched_url: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=bGtmGTbmaz
fetched_title: EIGEN-AGENT: ADAPTIVEMULTI-AGENTSCIENTIFIC REASONING WITHMONITOR-BASEDRAG
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:01:40Z

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
EIGEN-AGENT: ADAPTIVEMULTI-AGENTSCIENTIFIC
REASONING WITHMONITOR-BASEDRAG
Xiangru Tang1,∗,†, Wanghan Xu2,∗, Yujie Wang1,∗, Zijie Guo3,∗, Daniel Shao1, Jiapeng Chen1,
Cixuan Zhang1, Ziyi Wang4, Lixin Zhang5, Guancheng Wan6, Wenlong Zhang7, Lei Bai7,
Zhenfei Yin8, Philip Torr8, Hanrui Wang9, Di Jin9
1Yale University 2Shanghai Jiao Tong University 3Fudan University
4Wuhan University 5Tongji University 6University of California, Los Angeles
7Shanghai AI Lab 8University of Oxford 9Eigen AI
ABSTRACT
Large language models (LLMs) have recently shown strong progress on scientific
reasoning, yet two major bottlenecks remain. First, explicit retrieval fragments
reasoning, imposing a hidden “tool tax” of extra tokens and steps. Second, multi-
agent pipelines often dilute strong solutions by averaging across all candidates. We
address these challenges with a unified framework that combines implicit retrieval
and structured collaboration. At its foundation, aMonitor-based retrieval module
operates at the token level, integrating external knowledge with minimal disruption
to reasoning. On top of this substrate,Hierarchical Solution Refinement (HSR)
iteratively designates each candidate as an anchor to be repaired by its peers, while
Quality-Aware Iterative Reasoning (QAIR)adapts refinement to solution quality.
On Humanitys Last Exam (HLE) Bio/Chem Gold, our framework achieves 48.3%
accuracy—the highest reported to date, surpassing the strongest agent baseline by
13.4 points and leading frontier LLMs by up to 18.1 points, while simultaneously
reducing token usage by 53.5% and agent steps by 43.7%. Results on SuperGPQA
and TRQA confirm robustness across domains. Error analysis shows that reasoning
failures and knowledge gaps co-occur in over 85% of cases, while diversity analysis
reveals a clear dichotomy: retrieval tasks benefit from solution variety, whereas
reasoning tasks favor consensus. Together, these findings demonstrate how implicit
augmentation and structured refinement overcome the inefficiencies of explicit tool
use and uniform aggregation. The code is available at https://github.com/
tangxiangru/Eigen-1.
1 INTRODUCTION
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
Eigen-Agent (48.3%)
Eigen-Agent
Figure 1:HLE Bio/Chem Gold overall accuracy.On the 149-problem HLE Bio/Chem Gold split
(Pass@1, auto-judged by o3-mini), our system attains48.3%accuracy, exceeding the strongest
agent baseline (SciMaster) by+13.4points and leading frontier LLMs by up to+18.1points.
∗Equal contribution.
†Correspondence:xiangru.tang@yale.edu.
1

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Query: In population genetics, how can we estimate the effective
population size from sample polymorphism data?
Error Type 1: Over Confident, No RAG Error Type 2: RAG Calling Disrupted Reasoning
Answer: Okay, I know this is a
<population genetics>
problem. Effective population
size is calculated through
formula . So if
can be estimated from
polymorphism data, I can just
plug it into the formula and
got: ...
Actually, the correct formula
is . So the
answer is [wrong] .
Correctness:
Answer: This looks like a
<population genetics estimation
problem>. I think it involves
Watterson’s estimator, but I am not
entirely sure of the exact formula.
I don’t want to make a mistake…
maybe I should call retrieval.
<code>
output = RAG("Watterson's estimator")
</code>
Okay, so . But now I need
to re-align my reasoning: how to
connect back to the original problem
statement?
Interrupted Thinking[Execuation Error]
Figure 2:Population genetics case with two failure modes.Left (Error Type 1):the model confidently recalls
an incorrect formula (θ= 2N eµ) and derivesNe =θ/2µ , yielding the wrong answer.Right (Error Type 2):the
model retrieves the correct relation (θ= 4N eµ) via explicit RAG, but the reasoning flow is disrupted and the
result is not reintegrated into the original problem, illustrating thetool tax. Our Monitor-based RAG avoids this
context suspension by injecting the correct formula directly into the reasoning stream.
Recent advances in large language models have enabled impressive performance on a spectrum of
reasoning benchmarks, from general-purpose evaluations such as MMLU [21] and mathematical prob-
lem solving [9; 43] to domain-specific tasks including ScienceQA [38], MedQA [29], and GPQA [42].
These results indicate that LLMs can already handle factual recall and mid-level reasoning across
diverse domains. However, when moving to more demanding benchmarks such as Humanity’s Last
Exam (HLE) [39; 47], which targets expert-level biology and chemistry problems, performance de-
grades substantially, and systematic failures persist when problems require deep domain knowledge
and complex multistep reasoning [7]. Through comprehensive analysis of error patterns across 149
HLE Bio/Chem problems, we identify two fundamental architectural limitations:(1) the fragmentation
of logical flow through explicit tool invocation, and(2) the inefficiency of democratic multi-agent
collaboration.
Current retrieval-augmented generation systems [ 3; 19; 33] require explicit interruption to access
external knowledge. Each retrieval breaks the reasoning flow: suspending the logical state, formulating
queries, processing results, and reconstructing the context. Thistool taxcompounds quickly: solving
population genetics problems requires Watterson estimators requires 8-10 such interruptions, doubling
the number of agent steps compared to a baseline without information retrieval (see Table 3) while
reducing coherence. The problem persists in all RAG paradigms: single-round approaches [ 1; 45]
cannot adapt to emerging needs, iterative systems [27; 44] compound interruption costs, and reasoning-
aware methods [51; 55] remain bound by explicit invocation, as shown in Figure 2.
Simultaneously, most current multi-agent systems [4; 52] employ rigid democratic workflows: genera-
tion, criticism, synthesis, selection, treating all solutions equally regardless of quality. This contradicts
both cognitive science research on hierarchical expert reasoning [8; 32] and observations of scientific
collaboration where ideas naturally organize into anchors and support [14]. Our analysis reveals that
92.8% of the failures involve reasoning errors, while 88.7% involve knowledge gaps, with substantial
overlap, indicating that these challenges are fundamentally intertwined, as shown in Figure 7.
We present EIGEN-AGENT, an efficient agent framework that unifiesMonitor-based RAGeliminates
tool taxthrough implicit augmentation, operating continuously at the token level to detect knowl-
edge gaps via semantic uncertainty, generate contextual queries, and inject information seamlessly.
Hierarchical Solution Refinement (HSR)rotates each candidate solution as an anchor and applies
peer-informed repair from the remaining candidates, allowing structured cross-solution refinement
rather than uniform averaging.Quality-Aware Iterative Reasoning (QAIR)replaces fixed workflows
with adaptive cycles that respond dynamically to quality trajectories and problem characteristics. While
2

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
our experiments focus on integration within a multi-agent reasoning framework, the design of Monitor-
based RAG is model-agnostic and can in principle be incorporated into other reasoning systems without
architectural modification.
Our system achieves 48.3% accuracy in Humanity’s Last Exam Bio/Chem Gold, surpassing SciMas-
ter [4] (34.9%) by 13.4 percentage points while reducing token consumption by 53.5% and agent
steps by 43.7%. Solution pattern analysis further validates our framework: retrieval tasks benefit from
diversity, whereas reasoning tasks favor consensus. These results demonstrate that eliminating the tool
tax and embracing hierarchical collaboration enables both superior performance and computational
efficiency, with potential implications that might extend beyond scientific reasoning to any domain
requiring complex knowledge integration with logical inference.
2 RELATEDWORK
2.1 EVOLUTION OFRETRIEVAL-AUGMENTEDGENERATION
The integration of external knowledge into language model reasoning has evolved through
three main paradigms.Single-round RAGsystems [ 19; 25; 33] employ linear pipelines
(rewrite→retrieve→generate) and are effective for factual queries. REALM [ 19] enabled end-to-
end retrieval training, while RAG [33] extended this to knowledge-intensive tasks. More recent variants
such as REPLUG [45] and In-Context RALM [41] improve robustness via black-box integration, but
they lack adaptivity when knowledge needs emerge mid-reasoning.Iterative RAGintroduces retrieval-
generation loops for dynamic knowledge acquisition. ITER-RETGEN [ 44] alternates retrieval and
generation, Self-RAG [1] uses self-reflection to decide retrieval, FLARE [27] predicts future content,
and DRAGIN [48] updates datastores in real time. These improve grounding but typically incur 35×
more API calls.Reasoning-aware RAGembeds retrieval into reasoning itself. Chain-of-Note [ 57]
produces reading notes, RAT [51] couples retrieval with thought generation, IRCoT [49] interleaves
retrieval with chain-of-thought, and ReAct [54] unifies reasoning with action. While more integrated,
they still depend on explicit tool calls, fragmenting reasoning and increasing latency.
Table 1 summarizes these paradigms against our Monitor-based approach. Unlike step-level methods
that pause to query, Monitor-based RAG operates globally at the token level: it monitors uncertainty
signals and implicitly injects evidence into context, reducing retrieval overhead while preserving
reasoning continuity. Moreover, its retrieval granularity is finer, enabling more precise and frequent
evidence integration without overwhelming the reasoning process.
Table 1:RAG paradigms vs. key capabilities.Single-round RAG is efficient but inadaptable; iterative RAG
improves grounding but increases latency; reasoning-aware RAG offers tighter coupling yet still relies on explicit
calls.Monitor-based RAGintegrates evidence implicitly at the token level, improving continuity and efficiency.
System Triggering Fine-grained Continuity Efficiency Adaptivity
Single-round RAG✗ ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗
Iterative RAG✓ ✓ ✗ ✗ ✓
Reasoning RAG✓ ✓ ✓ ✗ ✓
Monitor-based RAG (Ours)✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
2.2 MULTI-AGENTREASONINGSYSTEMS
Multi-agent frameworks have shown promise through collaborative problem solving, yet many rely on
rigid orchestration assumptions.
Democratic collaboration systemstreat all agents equally. SciMasters [ 4] employs solvercriti-
crewriter pipelines with a selector over candidate solutions, while LLM-Debate [ 13], Debate-Only-
When-Necessary [15], and Multi-Agent Debate [ 35] use argumentative dialogue at different scales.
MetaGPT [22] assigns role-based responsibilities, and CAMEL [34] explores autonomous cooperation.
Table-Critic [56] extends these ideas to structured domains such as tabular reasoning. Such approaches,
however, may devote substantial computation to low-quality candidates and do not explicitly capture
hierarchical relationships among solutions.
Structured reasoning systemsexplore non-linear organizations. Tree-of-Thoughts [ 53] enables
branching exploration with backtracking, Graph-of-Thoughts [2] allows arbitrary reasoning topologies,
and Everything-of-Thoughts [11] combines multiple reasoning patterns. CoMM [5] introduces multi-
path prompting, while HM-RAG [37] couples hierarchical agents with multimodal retrieval. Although
these methods capture richer reasoning structures, they lack quality-aware adaptation and can rapidly
expand search spaces.
3

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
critically check
one by one
For each solution
Apply repair strategies:
- Logic Completion
- Numerical Correction
- Method Replacement
- Expression Refinement
Solution Quality Rubric:
Logical Reasonable
Answer Correct
Explanation Complete
High Confidence
→ Otherwise
Query
Answer
Select Best
Solution
Until Converge
repaired
solutions
suggestion
(b) Framework CorrectorProposer
…
Generate
initial
solutions
anchor
reference
…
Quality-Aware Iterative Reasoning
(QAIR)
Ranker
Refinement
Monitor
Reasoning
[Original Context]
[Additional Context]
RAGQuerier
Injector
Resume Reasoning
Original+AdditionalContext
Now that I have more
information, I can
continue my reasoning.
If Confusion Detected, triggers RAG
Hierarchical Solution Refinement
(HSR)
…
(a) Monitor-based RAG
... I know little about Pi...
By literature, Pi is 3.14 ....
To solve this
problem, I first
need to know
what Pi is.
corrector
Figure 3:Framework overview.(a)Monitor-based RAGoperates globally during reasoning: the
Monitor detects insufficiency in the reasoning stream, the Querier generates targeted queries, and
the Injector integrates retrieved evidence into context with minimal disruption. (b) Building on this
substrate, theProposergenerates initial candidate solutions. Each candidate is revised individually
by theCorrector, which applies local targeted fixes without access to other solutions. The improved
candidates are then passed toHSR, which enables cross-solution refinement via anchor–reference
relationships. Finally,QAIRevaluates overall quality and may invoke the Corrector again if needed,
while theRankerselects the strongest solution as the final answer.
Recent advancesattempt more flexible or adaptive coordination. AgentVerse [6] supports dynamic
team assembly, AutoGen [52] enables configurable conversation patterns, and Reflexion [46] incorpo-
rates self-improvement signals. Further, evolving orchestration [10], intent-propagation strategies [40],
RL-enhanced planning with graph-based policies [26], and collaborative leaderfollower training [16]
highlight the need for adaptive depth and role specialization. Hierarchical orchestration frameworks
such as AgentOrchestra [58] and HALO [23] exemplify this trend, emphasizing scalable coordination
via layered or logic-oriented control.
In contrast, our HSR and QAIR modules introduce hierarchical refinement and quality-driven iteration.
Rather than following critic–corrector or debate pipelines [35; 46; 52] that operate under democratic
comment–rewrite loops and risk over-investing in weak candidates, HSR organizes solutions into
anchor–reference structures for targeted repair, while QAIR applies quality-thresholded, suggestion-
guided revisions with early stopping. Crucially, both mechanisms operateon top ofmonitor-based
implicitRAG, enabling hierarchical, quality-aware convergence without suspending the reasoning
process, echoing cognitive science findings on expert problem solving [8].
Declarative vs. Procedural Frameworks (DSPy vs. Ours)Declarative frameworks such as DSPy [31]
compile tasks into prompt programs and retrieval policies, providing stability but with adaptation largely
at the stage level. Our approach is procedural and run-time: aMonitor,Querier, andInjectoroperate
during inference to adapt reasoning on the fly. This shift from compile-time templates to run-time
control enables finer-grained adaptivity and seamless knowledge infusion.
3 METHOD
Overall workflow.EIGEN-AGENTintegrates global retrieval, role-based reasoning, and higher-level
refinement into a unified workflow, as shown in Figure 3 and Algorithm 1. Monitor-based RAG operates
globally during reasoning:Monitordetects insufficiency in the reasoning stream, the Querier formulates
targeted queries, and the Injector seamlessly integrates retrieved evidence back into context. Based on
this substrate,Proposergenerates diverse candidate solutions, each of which is individually revised by
Correctorthrough targeted local repairs. The refined candidates are then passed toHierarchical Solution
Refinement (HSR), which introduces cross-solution repair through anchor-reference interactions. Next,
4

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Quality-Aware Iterative Reasoning (QAIR)evaluates overall quality and may invoke the corrector again
for additional improvement. Finally,Rankercompares candidates and selects the strongest as the final
solution. All agents can use web search tool (Serp API [30]) by default.
3.1 MONITOR-BASEDRETRIEVAL-AUGMENTEDGENERATION
Our Monitor-based RAG system augments reasoning implicitly, without fragmenting the workflow
through explicit tool calls. Instead of forcing the LLM to pause, formulate a query, and inject evidence,
the Monitor continuously inspects the reasoning trace, identifies potential knowledge insufficiencies,
and invokes retrieval only when strictly necessary. The construction of the RAG database is shown in
Appendix A.1.
3.1.1 MONITOR: DETECTINGUNCERTAINTY ANDTRIGGERINGRETRIEVAL
The Monitor acts as a sentinel that periodically examines the reasoning trace and determines whether
external knowledge is required:
Monitor(context) =
1,if retrieval is required,
0,otherwise.
Here,contextrefers to the partial reasoning sequence. Once insufficiency is detected, the retrieval is
immediately triggered. To balance timeliness and efficiency, the Monitor runs in a streaming setup:
It checks the reasoning at fixed intervals of 512 characters with an overlap of 128 characters. This
overlapping design ensures that uncertainty markers that cross boundaries are not missed while keeping
latency low. Details of RAG Monitor are in Appendix A.5.
3.1.2 QUERIER: IDENTIFYINGUNCERTAINTY ANDGENERATINGTARGETEDQUERIES
Triggered by the Monitor, the Querier converts the uncertain fragment into one or more retrieval queries:
[query1,...,query n] =Querier(context) . Here, the Querier maps the reasoning context into one or
more concise, contextually appropriate queries. A key requirement of the Querier is to precisely extract
the minimal set of keywords that capture the essential uncertainty in the reasoning trace. Depending on
the task, this may result in a single keyword or a small collection of terms, each corresponding to a
distinct retrieval perspective. The number and specificity of the generated queries directly determine
the granularity of retrieval, which in turn controls the trade-off between recall and precision in RAG.
By ensuring that queries are as fine-grained as possible, the Querier avoids unnecessary expansion of
the search space while maximizing the relevance of retrieved evidence.
3.1.3 INJECTOR: EVIDENCECOMPRESSION ANDCONTEXTUALINTEGRATION
The Injector first filters and compresses raw RAG outputs into concise, utility-focused snippets to avoid
redundancy and irrelevant noise. Then it rewrites and integrates the selected evidence in the Proposer’s
reasoning context, ensuring coherence and preserving the natural flow of the reasoning narrative. This
two-step design allows the knowledge retrieved to improve accuracy without introducing stylistic or
structural disruptions: additional context=Injector(context,RAG results).
Figure 2 shows a population genetic problem that requires the Watterson estimator. Baseline LLMs
exhibit two characteristic errors: (1) confidently recalling the wrong formula (θ= 2N eµ) and deriving
an incorrect effective population size, or (2) retrieving the correct formula (θ= 4N eµ) via explicit RAG
but failing to reintegrate it into the original reasoning chain, a classic case oftool tax. Our Monitor-based
RAG resolves both issues: the Monitor detects semantic uncertainty, the Querier generates a targeted
query, and the Injector seamlessly injects the correct formula into the reasoning stream, allowing the
solution to proceed without disruption and converge to the correct answer, as shown in Figure 4.
3.2 HIERARCHICALSOLUTIONREFINEMENT(HSR)
HSR challenges the assumption that all solutions should contribute equally to the final output. Instead
of democratic averaging, HSR establishes structured relationships among solutions that mirror expert
collaboration patterns. LetS={s 1,...,s n} denote the candidate solutions. Each solution is iteratively
designated as the anchorsi, while the remaining setR=S\{s i} provides references. This rotation
ensures that every solution benefits from peer-informed repair, preventing premature convergence to a
single trajectory.
Formally, the process can be described ass′
i =Refine(s i,R) , where Refine(·) denotes the LLM-driven
mechanism that applies multidimensional repairs to the anchor. Specifically, logical completion fills
missing reasoning steps or implicit assumptions, numerical correction resolves arithmetic inaccuracies,
method replacement substitutes stronger strategies for weaker ones, and expression refinement improves
5

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Start from a diploid autosome that contains 5 SNPs from two inbred strains of the organism,
and allowing exactly one directional crossover per gamete in each generation (F1 → F2 → F3),
determine the number of possible unique haplotype sequences in the F3 generation.
"Okay, then haplotypes of 5 SNPs can be represented as binary
strings. Sequences with 4 change-points (01010, 10101)
cannot arise by F3, but all with 0–3 change-points are possible.
I should compute how many such binary strings exist."
Monitor <Detected> “Uncertainty” : “Maximum number of recombination-induced change-points”
Querier <Generate> “Query”: “How many haplotype recombination change-points during single
crossover meiosis in population genetics.”
RAG Tool < Retrieve> “Knowledge” : "During meiosis, a single crossover introduces at most one new
breakpoint per gamete. Across successive generations, recombination patterns accumulate, but
typically require more crossovers than two rounds of meiosis..."
Injector <Inject Information to Reasoning> (1) At most one breakpoint per gamete (2) fully alternating
haplotypes cannot appear within a few generations as F2 ⟶ F3
Question:
Step 1-1: LLM Begins Reasoning:
"We start with two inbred strains A and B, each homozygous. The F1 generation carries haplotypes from
both parents. In F2 and F3, recombination can introduce change-points, but I am uncertain how many
unique haplotypes can arise by F3"
Monitor-based RAG Triggered:
Step 1-2: LLM Resumes Reasoning:
Coding
Exacuation
Step 2: Final Summary
Executor Output:
Counts by change-points: {0: 2, 1: 8, 2: 12, 3: 8, 4: 2}
Total valid haplotypes (0–3 change-points): 30
"So, among the 32 possible binary haplotypes of 5 SNPs, only 4 change-points are excluded.
Therefore, F3 can produce 30 unique haplotypes." <answer>30</answer>
Figure 4:Haplotype counting with single crossovers (F1→F3).The Proposer exhibits uncertainty about
recombination constraints;Monitordetects insufficiency,Querierissues a targeted query, andInjectorintegrates
two retrieved facts. This enables the reasoning to exclude invalid cases and converge on correct count of 30
haplotypes.
clarity without altering substance. These dimensions ensure that the weaknesses of the anchor are
addressed systematically while preserving its original strengths.
Figure 5 shows a pathway reasoning problem where multiple proposers generate partial but inconsistent
solutions. Baseline multi-agent synthesis averages across candidates, often propagating contradictions
or omitting critical intermediates. Instead, HSR designates one solution as the anchor and integrates
targeted corrections from reference solutions (e.g., filling in missing intermediates or fixing reaction
links). This yields a coherent and biologically valid pathway, demonstrating how HSR consolidates
fragmented contributions into a unified solution. QAIR then evaluates the refined set and can terminate
the process once the quality stabilizes, avoiding unnecessary additional cycles.
3.3 QUALITY-AWAREITERATIVEREASONING(QAIR)
QAIR introduces an evaluation-driven control mechanism to refine candidate solutions after the HSR
stage. LetS′ ={s′
1,...,s ′
n} denote the initial set of refined candidate solutions. Each solutions′∈S′
is evaluated by an LLM-based evaluator on three quality dimensions: logic, answer, and explanation,
and a textual suggestion for improvement is generated. Each dimension is scored on a scale from 0
to 5, and the three quality scores are then combined into a composite score:q(s′) = 0.2·q logic(s′) +
0.6·q answer(s′) + 0.2·q explanation(s′), where the higher weight on the answer dimension emphasizes
the correctness of the final answer while still allowing for logical consistency and explanatory clarity.
Candidates meeting the thresholdτ= 3 are retained, while those failing are marked non-passing and
passed to the corrector for targeted revision:˜s=Corrector(s′,suggestion(s′)).
LetF t denote the set of solutions that fail the evaluation in roundt, andE t denote the set of solutions
evaluated at roundt. Iterative refinement continues exclusively on the subset of failed solutions, forming
the evaluation set for the next roundEt+1 ={˜s|s′∈F t}, until all solutions pass or maximum rounds
6

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Tem entomologists collect 500,000 camera trap images (3MP, 10 cm FOV) of pollinators on
Solidago altissima. They want to identify all pollinators and count flowers fed on in each image.
Which single method would be easiest to process these images for the required data?
Question:
D. Manual, 410hA. EfficientNet, 5 species (36h train + 13.8h deploy)
B. EfficientNet, 500 species (126h train + 13.8h deploy)
C. ResNet, 500 species (128h train + 11.8h deploy) F. B + C
E. A + B
Answer Choice
Anchor Solution Reference
Solutions
…
C. ResNet
500 species
EfficientNet (Option A, B) and ResNet( C) are classification
models ⟶ can’t identify multiple pollinators and count flowers
in the same image ⟶ Option D is correct
Deployment time: Option C = 126 + 13.8 = (139.8 hours), less than A: (49.8 hours)
and B: (139.8 hours) ⟶ Option C is the fastest for deployment
Although EfficientNet is generally faster than ResNet in practice, but we proceed
with the given number. Hence, Option C is chosen as the most appropriate.
Numeric correction:
Targeted
Correctness
Numeric correction: the comparison of deployment time is incorrect; Option A
is the fastest rather than Option C.
Method Correction: Classification models such as EfficientNet and ResNet cannot
simultaneously recognize multiple insects. Counting requires either a detection model (like
Faster R-CNN, YOLO) or a density map approach. So, only Option D remains correct.
Logic Correction: Time cannot be the only criterion, even though C has fewer hours.
Clarify Correction: Even if given times suggest C is fastest, it cannot be considered a solution
because it fails the fundamental requirement. Thus, the correct answer under the single-
method rule is Option D (manual).
Figure 5:Illustrative example: HSR.The system rotates anchors among candidate solutions and integrates
targeted corrections from references (e.g., fixing arithmetic mistakes, filling missing steps). Instead of averaging
inconsistent candidates, HSR applies targeted improvements to yield a coherent final answer.
Tmax is reached. By coupling structured quality assessment with suggestion-driven repair and avoiding
re-evaluation of already validated candidates, QAIR efficiently converges toward a high-quality solution
set while maintaining logical consistency, answer correctness, and explanatory clarity.
4 EXPERIMENTS
4.1 EXPERIMENTALSETUP
Table 2:Benchmark comparison under matched protocol.HLE
Bio/Chem (149 problems; o3-mini judge), SuperGPQA Biology (hard
split), and TRQA Literature (multiple-choice).
Model HLE Bio/Chem SuperGPQA Hard TRQA
Base Models
Kimi K2 6.71 48.91 38.37
DeepSeek V3.1 13.42 66.30 43.60
Claude Opus 4.1 21.48 63.04 42.44
Gemini 2.5 Pro 18.79 65.22 45.93
GPT-5 22.82 61.96 50.58
Grok-4 30.20 66.30 46.51
Agent Systems
SciMaster (GPT 4.1) [4] 9.45 19.78 47.67
Autogen (GPT 4.1) [52] 7.38 29.35 51.74
OpenAI Deep Research (o4-mini) 22.82 39.13 -
Biomni (GPT 4.1) [24] 10.74 43.48 41.09
SciMaster (DeepSeek V3.1) 34.92 66.30 51.74
EIGEN-AGENT(DeepSeek V3.1, Pass@1) 48.30 69.57 54.65
EIGEN-AGENT(DeepSeek V3.1, Pass@5) 61.74 78.26 79.07
We evaluate our approach on
Humanity’s Last Exam (HLE)
Bio/Chem Gold [ 47]1, compris-
ing 149 graduate-level problems
in biology, medicine, and chem-
istry. HLE Bio/Chem Gold sub-
set was manually curated and cor-
rected by domain experts to en-
sure label fidelity. Additionally,
we test on 92 hard-difficulty prob-
lems from SuperGPQA [12] Biol-
ogy and 172 problems from TRQA
Literature [ 59]. Our framework
uses DeepSeek-V3.1 [ 36] as the base model with temperature 0.5 and 64K token limit. Follow-
ing HLE protocol, we employ o3-mini for automated evaluation (See Appendix A.3). Beyond accuracy,
we log total generated tokens and agent steps in the ablation experiments, as quantitative measures of
the tool tax.
4.2 MAINRESULTS
In the HLE Bio / Chem dataset, our system achieves48.3%accuracy (Pass@1), substantially outper-
forming the strongest baseline Grok-4 (30.2%) by nearly 18 absolute points and more than doubling
1https://huggingface.co/datasets/futurehouse/hle-gold-bio-chem
7

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
the performance of general purpose models such as GPT-5 (22.8%) and Claude Opus 4.1 (21.5%). This
margin is particularly notable, given that HLE problems require domain-specific reasoning rather than
surface-level recall.
In SuperGPQA hard biology, our method reaches69.6%, exceeding all competing large models. The
improvement is consistent across question categories, suggesting that our framework not only boosts
correctness but also improves robustness on especially challenging scientific queries.
Figure 6:Comparison of retrieval
backends within Monitor-based RAG.
Vanilla Vanna HippoRAG LightRAG
RAG Methods
0
10
20
30
40Accuracy
Finally, in TRQA benchmark, which emphasizes Information
retrieval, integration and reasoning, our method obtains54.7%
Pass@1, surpassing both Grok-4 (46.5%) and Gemini 2.5 Pro
(45.9%). Furthermore, under the more permissive Pass@5,
counting success if any of five attempts is correctaccuracy rises
to79.1%, indicating robustness under a best-of-N setting.
Together, these results establish the advantage of our design
in three heterogeneous benchmarks: biomedical, chemical and
medical, demonstrating not only raw accuracy gains, but also
improved adaptability across domains (Table 2). For more results
of baseline models, please refer to Appendix A.10.
Within the Monitor-based RAG framework, we experimented
with four retrieval backends: Vanilla [ 17], Vanna, HippoRAG [ 28], and LightRAG [ 18]. Among
these,HippoRAGachieved the most consistent gains when coupled with our uncertainty detection. We
attribute this to its finer-grained retrieval and graph-structured indexing, which better capture relevant
context fragments without overwhelming the reasoning stream. Based on these results, we adopt
HippoRAG as the default retrieval backend in our Monitor module (Figure 6).
4.3 COMPONENTANALYSIS
To understand the contribution of each architectural component, we performed systematic analysis
on the full HLE Bio/Chem benchmark (149 problems), considering both incremental build-up and
component ablation (Table 3).
The baseline configuration uses five parallel Proposers with access to a generic web search tool but
without any paper retrieval (no RAG). TheExplicit RAGsetting adds a scientific paper database
queried via embedding-based similarity. Unless otherwise noted, all settings use the same five-Proposer
architecture with CriticCorrector refinement and Ranker selection.
The baseline system without external knowledge achieves 25.3% accuracy, underscoring the limitations
of parametric knowledge alone for graduate-level science problems. Adding an explicit paper database
improves accuracy to 41.4%, but at the cost of a sharp increase in workflow iterations (from 43.4 to 94.8).
This reflects the high overhead of explicit retrieval: each tool call suspends reasoning, requires query
formulation, and forces reintegration of results, fragmenting what should be a continuous reasoning
flow. While the first one or two retrievals may be helpful, repeated interruptions often add little value
and compound this “tool tax.”
Reasoning Process Error 92.78%
Knowledge Application Error 88.66%
Execution & Adherence Error 13.40%
Comprehension Error 9.28%
Figure 7:Error type distribution.Analysis of incorrect solution logs shows
reasoning- and knowledge-related errors as dominant. Note that a single
problem may involve multiple error types, so percentages do not sum to 100.
Our Monitor-based RAG
mitigates this overhead
through implicit augmen-
tation. By continuously
monitoring generation and
injecting knowledge only
when necessary, it reduces
token consumption by more
than half (from 470.6K to
218.4K) and cuts workflow
iterations nearly in half
(from 94.8 to 51.3), while maintaining competitive accuracy (34.5%). Adding the Querier improves
query precision, leading to a modest gain to 36.8%. The limited margin compared to Monitor alone
suggests that the primary bottleneck lies not in query formation but in evidence integration, which is
addressed by the Injector. With the Injector, accuracy rises further to 40.3% with minimal additional
overhead.
Hierarchical Solution Refinement (HSR) then contributes complementary gains, raising accuracy to
43.7%. Instead of naive aggregation, HSR leverages anchorreference interactions to apply targeted
8

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
Table 3:Component analysis from two perspectives on the full HLE Bio/Chem benchmark (149
problems).(a) Incremental build-up: modules are added one by one. (b) Component ablation: each
module is removed from the full system. The baseline configuration uses five parallel Proposers with
web search but without external paper retrieval (no RAG).Steps= agent-level workflow iterations
(not token-level reasoning).
(a) Incremental build-up (b) Component ablation
Configuration Accuracy (%) Tokens (K) Steps Configuration Accuracy (%) Tokens (K) Steps
Baseline (no ext. knowledge & no RAG) 25.3 483.6 43.4 Full system48.3 218.953.4
+ Papers (Explicit RAG) 41.4 470.6 94.8 – (Monitor, Querier, Injector) 48.5 461.3 95.3
+ Monitor only 34.5 218.4 51.3 – Querier 45.9 224.1 53.1
+ Monitor + Querier 36.8 213.0 51.7 – Injector 44.7 202.5 52.1
+ Monitor + Querier + Injector 40.3 229.5 53.1 – HSR 44.8 234.1 53.5
+ Monitor + Querier + Injector + HSR 43.7 214.0 52.9 – QAIR 43.7 214.0 52.9
+ Monitor + Querier + Injector + HSR + QAIR48.3 218.953.4
repairs, focusing revisions where they matter most (e.g., filling missing reasoning steps or correcting
arithmetic). This adds some extra reasoning steps but yields proportionally higher accuracy.
Finally, Quality-Aware Iterative Reasoning (QAIR) builds on HSR by selectively invoking the Corrector
when evaluation indicates further refinement is necessary. This yields the best overall result in the
incremental sequence: 48.3% accuracy with 218.9K tokens and 53.4 iterations. Although QAIR
introduces slight additional overhead, it ensures that every revision contributes meaningfully, preventing
uncontrolled exploration or redundant cycles.
The ablation analysis further validates these findings: removing the Monitor results in a significant
increase in the number of tokens and agent steps; and omitting HSR or QAIR lowers final performance
to 44.8% and 43.7%, respectively. Together, these results show that Monitor-based RAG reduces the tool
tax, HSR provides structured cross-solution repair, and QAIR ensures convergence through selective
correction. Their combination achieves both state-of-the-art accuracy and controlled computation.
5 ANALYSIS
5.1 ERRORTYPEDISTRIBUTION
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Average Pairwise Consistency Score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Average Accuracy Score
Reasoning T ype (n=392)
Trend (r=0.840)
95% Confidence
Correlation: 0.840
Slope: 0.851
Samples: 392
0.0 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
Average Pairwise Consistency Score
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0Average Accuracy Score
Information Retrieval T ype (n=339)
Trend (r=0.881)
95% Confidence
Correlation: 0.881
Slope: 0.369
Samples: 339
Consistency vs Accuracy by Question T ype
Figure 8:Diversity vs. consensus.Task-dependent effect of solution diversity:
retrieval tasks benefit from variety, while reasoning tasks benefit from agree-
ment. The horizontal axis reports theaverage pairwise consistency scoreamong
Proposers, computed by an LLM-based judge that evaluates semantic overlap
between answers on a 0–1 scale. The vertical axis shows theaverage accuracy
score, also judged by an LLM, which rates the degree of correctness of each an-
swer relative to ground truth on a continuous 0–1 scale (rather than a binary 0/1).
This continuous evaluation enables us to capture fine-grained trends between
diversity and correctness across tasks. The fitted trend lines further highlight
the contrast: retrieval tasks show a relatively flat slope ( ≈0.369 ), whereas
reasoning tasks exhibit a much steeper positive slope (≈0.851 ), indicating a
stronger dependence on consensus.
Analysis of failed prob-
lems reveals two dominant
error modes: reasoning
process errors (92.78%)
and knowledge applica-
tion errors (88.66%), as
shown in Figure 7. These
frequently co-occur, sug-
gesting that successful sci-
entific reasoning requires
seamless integration of do-
main knowledge with log-
ical inference. Execution
errors (13.40%) and com-
prehension errors (9.28%)
are comparatively rare, in-
dicating that the primary
challenge lies not in un-
derstanding problems or
following instructions, but
in maintaining coherent
reasoning while access-
ing relevant knowledge.
The strong overlap also
suggests interdependence:
missing knowledge often manifests as faulty reasoning steps, and disrupted reasoning in turn prevents
effective incorporation of retrieved facts. For more examples of these different errors, see Appendix A.6.
5.2 DIVERSITY VS. CONSENSUS INMULTI-AGENTSOLUTIONS
Our framework employs multiple parallelProposersto generate candidate solutions and utilizes a
Rankerto select the final answer. A natural assumption is that higher agreement among Proposers
9

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
should correlate with higher accuracy. However, our analysis reveals a more nuanced picture: the
relationship between solution diversity and correctness depends strongly on problem type.
To investigate this, we divide the benchmark into two categories:information retrievaltasks, which
rely heavily on external knowledge, andreasoningtasks, which require longer chains of inference. For
each problem, we measure the level of agreement among Proposers and evaluate how it correlates with
accuracy. Both metrics are scored continuously by an LLM judge on a [0,1] scale: consistency reflects
the pairwise agreement among candidate answers, while accuracy measures the graded alignment
between a candidate and the ground-truth solution (see Appendix A.3). This continuous evaluation
enables fine-grained correlation analysis beyond binary correctness. As shown in Fig 8, retrieval
tasks benefit from diversity (low agreement), whereas reasoning tasks benefit from consensus (high
agreement), with correlation slopes of0.369and0.851, respectively.
This dichotomy suggests that different ranking strategies are optimal for different task types. In retrieval-
heavy settings, the Ranker should preserve diversity and aggregate complementary perspectives,
whereas in reasoning-heavy tasks, it should prioritize high-consensus answers as indicators of reliability.
These observations highlight the complementary roles of HSR and QAIR, which operationalize the
transition from diversity to consensus in a task-adaptive manner.
5.3 TOOLTAXQUANTIFICATION
Tool Tax

Token Decrease
Accuracy Increase
Eigen-Agent
Baseline+RAG
Figure 9:Quantifying the tool tax.Com-
parison of accuracy and coherence relative
to compute cost, showing the overhead of
explicit retrieval vs. implicit augmentation.
Note that in this analysis, the baseline refers
to the explicit RAG configuration (i.e., Pro-
posers equipped with paper retrieval and web
search), which represents the standard setup
in most existing agent systems.
The computational burden of explicit tool invocation ex-
tends beyond simple latency. As shown in Table 3, the
explicit RAG baseline(with Proposers equipped with paper
retrieval and web search) more than doubles agent-level
workflow iterations compared to the no-IR setting (43.4
→ 94.8). This quantifies a hiddentool taxfrom context
switching between reasoning and retrieval modes: each call
requires the system to pause the evolving chain of thought,
formulate a query, process external results, and then recon-
struct the local context before continuingfragmenting what
should be a continuous inference process.
Fig. 9 visualizes this trade-off. Explicit RAG produces
substantially longer traces without commensurate gains,
whereas ourMonitor-based RAGmaintains concise, inter-
pretable reasoning by injecting only the evidence that is
needed, precisely when it is needed. Operating implicitly at
generation time, it delivers comparable knowledge augmen-
tation with markedly fewer tokens and iterations, avoiding
repeated context suspensions.
More broadly, these findings argue forimplicit augmenta-
tionandadaptive tool policiesin agent design: systems
should not treat all retrieval calls equally, but modulate re-
trieval frequency and depth based on emerging uncertainty,
problem structure, and expected utilitypreserving continuity
of reasoning while still accessing external knowledge when
it truly helps.
6 CONCLUSION
Our experiments validate three key architectural innovations in EIGEN-AGENT. First, implicit knowl-
edge augmentation through Monitor-based RAG substantially reduces explicit retrieval overhead while
preserving reasoning coherence. Second, HSR improves over uniform multi-agent aggregation by
introducing structured anchor–reference relationships. Third, QAIR adaptively balances exploration and
early stopping, achieving an effective trade-off between diversity and consensus. On HLE Bio/Chem,
EIGEN-AGENTreaches 48.3% accuracy under compute-matched settings, with a 53.5% token reduction,
showing that targeted architectural design can enhance both effectiveness and efficiency. By integrating
external knowledge with minimal disruption to reasoning flow, our framework addresses key limitations
of prior approaches in complex scientific problem solving. Future work will extend these principles to
additional scientific domains, assess robustness and transferability, and explore integration into broader
scientific workflows.
10

Published as a conference paper at ICLR 2026
ETHICSSTATEMENT
Our study aims to improve the scientific reasoning capabilities of large language models (LLMs) by
introducing a unified framework that combines implicit retrieval and hierarchical collaboration. All
datasets used in this work, includingHumanity’s Last Exam (HLE),SuperGPQA, andTRQA, are
publicly available under open licenses. No private, sensitive, or human-identifiable data are involved.
All annotations, where applicable, are derived from public benchmarks or generated using synthetic
processes, ensuring that no ethical concerns regarding data privacy or misuse arise. The broader
societal impact of this research lies in its potential to enhance scientific reasoning and complex problem-
solving abilities in AI systems, which can be applied to fields such as education, scientific discovery,
and decision support. Care has been taken to avoid overstating capabilities or drawing misleading
conclusions, and we encourage further research to validate our findings across other high-stakes
domains.
REPRODUCIBILITYSTATEMENT
To ensure reproducibility, we provide detailed descriptions of our dataset preprocessing procedures,
agent prompting strategies, and iterative refinement workflow in the appendix. These include full
pipeline configurations and experimental setups required to reproduce the reported results with high
fidelity.
