record_id: openalex:W7149349454
source_used: doi_landing_html
fetched_url: https://link.springer.com/chapter/10.1007/978-3-032-21625-0_14
fetched_title: CAD: AI-Agent Framework for Learning Word Game
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:01:15Z

Abstract

Large Language Model (LLM)-based AI Agents, such as ChatGPT, Claude, and Gemini, have demonstrated strong potential in natural language processing and intelligent tutoring. However, vocabulary acquisition among primary school students (ages 6–11) remains a persistent challenge due to limited motivation, repetitive drills, and a lack of contextualization. To address this gap, we propose an educational game designed for children that integrates an AI Agent as an intelligent orchestrator of the learning process. The agent leverages contextual understanding, memory, and tool integration to support error-tolerant multimodal interaction (text and speech). By analyzing data collected during gameplay, the system dynamically tracks learning progress, adjusts difficulty, modifies game flow, and expands vocabulary content without manual reconfiguration. Experimental evaluations demonstrate that the proposed architecture achieves a 123.1× speedup in response latency compared to pure-LLM baselines, while the adaptive mechanism yields a 52% increase in vocabulary acquisition and a 90% user retention rate. This approach overcomes the limitations of traditional vocabulary learning systems, which often rely on static databases and rigid structures. The anticipated contributions of this work include: (i) enhancing vocabulary retention through gamification, (ii) increasing engagement and motivation among primary school learners, and (iii) demonstrating the feasibility of AI Agents as adaptive and personalized coordinators in educational environments. Ultimately, this work introduces a novel agent-based learning paradigm that aligns with the language learning needs of children in the AI era, paving the way for more interactive, personalized, and sustainable vocabulary learning systems.

This is a preview of subscription content, log in via an institution

to check access.

Access this chapter

Log in via an institution

Subscribe and save

Springer+

from $39.99 /Month

Starting from 10 chapters or articles per month

Access and download chapters and articles from more than 300k books and 2,500 journals

Cancel anytime

View plans

Buy Now

Chapter

USD 29.95

Price excludes VAT (USA)

eBook

USD 89.00

Price excludes VAT (USA)

Softcover Book

USD 119.99

Price excludes VAT (USA)

Tax calculation will be finalised at checkout

Purchases are for personal use only

Institutional subscriptions

Similar content being viewed by others

Harnessing Large Language Models for Education: A Framework for Designing Effective Pedagogical AI Agents

Chapter

© 2025

Beyond Chatbots: Enhancing Luxembourgish Language Learning Through Multi-agent Systems and Large Language Model

Chapter

© 2025

An Adaptive AI Tool for Introductory French and German Courses

Chapter

© 2026

Explore related subjects

Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning.

eLearning

Intelligence Augmentation

Artificial Intelligence

Computational Intelligence

Symbolic AI

Multiagent Systems
