record_id: openreview:5aHmaMFJns
source_used: openreview_pdf
fetched_url: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=5aHmaMFJns
fetched_title: REASON FOR FUTURE , ACT FOR NOW: A P RINCIPLED ARCHITECTURE FOR AUTONOMOUS LLM A GENTS
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:08:56Z

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
REASON FOR FUTURE , ACT FOR NOW: A P RINCIPLED
ARCHITECTURE FOR AUTONOMOUS LLM A GENTS
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
ABSTRACT
Large language models (LLMs) demonstrate impressive reasoning abilities, but
translating reasoning into actions in the real world remains challenging. In partic-
ular, it is unclear how to complete a given task provably within a minimum number
of interactions with the external environment, e.g., through an internal mechanism
of reasoning. To this end, we propose the first framework with provable regret
guarantees to orchestrate reasoning and acting, which we call “reason for future,
act for now” (RAFA). Specifically, we design a prompt template for reasoning that
learns from the memory buffer and plans a future trajectory over a long horizon
(“reason for future”). At each step, the LLM agent takes the initial action of the
planned trajectory (“act for now”), stores the collected feedback in the memory
buffer, and reinvokes the reasoning routine to replan the future trajectory from the
new state. The key idea is to cast reasoning in LLMs as learning and planning
in Bayesian adaptive Markov decision processes (MDPs). Correspondingly, we
prompt LLMs to form an updated posterior of the unknown environment from
the memory buffer (learning) and generate an optimal trajectory for multiple fu-
ture steps that maximizes a value function (planning). The learning and planning
subroutines are performed in an “in-context” manner to emulate the actor-critic
update for MDPs. Our theoretical analysis establishes a
√
T regret, while our
experimental validation demonstrates superior empirical performance.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) exhibit remarkable reasoning abilities, which open a new avenue for
agents to interact with the real world autonomously. However, turning reasoning into actions remains
challenging. Specifically, although LLMs are equipped with the prior knowledge obtained through
pretraining, it is stateless in nature and ungrounded in the real world, which makes the resulting
action suboptimal. To bridge the reasoning-acting gap, we aim to design an internal mechanism of
reasoning on top of LLMs, which optimizes actions iteratively by incorporating feedbacks from the
external environment. In particular, we focus on the sample efficiency of autonomous LLM agents
in interactive decision-making tasks, which plays a key role in their practical adoption, especially
when interactions are costly and risky. Our primary goal is to enable agents to complete a given
task in a guaranteed manner through reasoning within a minimum number of interactions with the
external environment.
Reinforcement learning (RL) is a well-studied paradigm for improving actions by collecting feed-
backs. However, to tailor existing RL techniques for autonomous LLM agents, we lack a rigorous
mapping between RL and LLMs, which leads to various conceptual discrepancies. For example, RL
operates in a numerical system, where rewards and transitions are defined by scalars and probabili-
ties. In comparison, the inputs and outputs of LLMs are described by tokens in a linguistic system.
As another example, LLMs are trained on a general-purpose corpus and remain fixed throughout
the interactive process. In contrast, RL trains actors and critics on the collected feedback iteratively.
Thus, it appears inappropriate to treat LLMs as actors or critics under the RL framework, although
all of them are parameterized by deep neural networks. Moreover, it remains unclear what reasoning
with LLMs means under the RL framework, e.g., what are the inputs and outputs of a reasoning rou-
tine and how reasoning should be coordinated with acting. Such conceptual discrepancies prevent
1

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
̂P
̂r
̂V
prior posterior
update
Environmentrt←r(st,at),st+1∼P(⋅|st,at)
at
Learning
̂st+1
Planning
t t+1 t+2 t+3
memory buﬀer
s0,a0,s1,r0
stk−1,atk−1,stk
,rtk−1
⋯
̂Vt+3
st,at,st+1,rt
⋯
stk
,atk
,stk+1,rtk
̂st+2
at+1
at+2
append
Agent
st
depth-3 tree-search
breadth-2
tree-search
“act for now”
“reason
for future”
st+1
t+4
𝙸𝚏−𝚂𝚠𝚒𝚝𝚌𝚑
discarded
𝚈𝚘𝚞𝚛𝚊𝚝𝚝𝚎𝚖𝚙𝚝𝚎𝚍𝚊𝚗𝚜𝚠𝚎𝚛𝚜
𝚊𝚗𝚍𝚏𝚎𝚎𝚍𝚋𝚊𝚌𝚔𝚜𝚊𝚛𝚎
{𝚎𝚡𝚊𝚖𝚙𝚕𝚎𝚜}
:
Figure 1: Illustra-
tion of the RAFA
(“reason for fu-
ture, act for now”)
framework.
us from establishing a principled framework beyond borrowing the “trial and error” concept from
RL straightforwardly and make it difficult to achieve provable sample efficiency guarantees. For in-
stance, it is known in RL that an improper design of agents may induce an exponential dependency
on horizons in the sample complexity. Without the RL-LLM correspondence, it is hard to avoid the
same flaw in autonomous LLM agents.
To address such conceptual discrepancies, we formalize reasoning and acting with LLMs under a
Bayesian adaptive Markov decision process (MDP) framework, where the latent variable of interest
is the unknown environment. The starting point is to cast the full history of states (of the external
environment), actions, rewards, and their linguistic summaries in the memory buffer as the infor-
mation state of Bayesian adaptive MDPs. Throughout the interactive process, the information state
accumulates a growing collection of feedbacks from the external environment, which is mapped to
an optimized action at each step by an internal mechanism of reasoning. As detailed below, we
construct the reasoning routine through two key subroutines, namely learning and planning, which
are instantiated by LLMs with specially designed prompts. (a) The learning subroutine forms an
updated posterior of the unknown environment from the memory buffer. Depending on whether we
emulate the model-based or model-free approach of RL, the learning subroutine infers the transition
and reward models (model) or/and the value function (critic).(b) The planning subroutine generates
an optimal policy (actor) or trajectory for multiple future steps, which maximizes the value function
(up to a certain error). Depending on the specific configuration of the state and action spaces (con-
tinuous versus discrete) and the transition and reward models (stochastic versus deterministic), the
planning subroutine emulates the value iteration algorithm, the random shooting algorithm, or the
Monte-Carlo tree-search algorithm.
Although LLMs remain fixed throughout the interactive process, they are prompted to utilize the
growing collection of feedbacks from the external environment as contexts. Through the learning
subroutine, the collected feedback reduces the posterior uncertainty in models or values, which
allows the planning subroutine to obtain an improved policy at each step. In other words, we emulate
the actor-model or actor-critic update for Bayesian adaptive MDPs in an in-context manner, where
LLMs function as an internal mechanism that improves models, values, and policies iteratively.
Specifically, existing RL methods use deep neural networks to parameterize models, values, and
policies, which map states (of the external environment) and actions to scalars and probabilities.
In comparison, we use LLMs to represent the learning and planning algorithms in RL, which are
composed to map data in the memory buffer to actions. Here, data and actions are allowed to be
tokens in a linguistic system.
We conclude our contributions in this paper from two perspectives. (a) Our theoretical analysis
proves that RAFA achieves a
√
T regret. In particular, the regret bound highlights an intriguing
interplay between the prior knowledge obtained through pretraining and the uncertainty reduction
achieved by reasoning and acting. (b) Our empirical validation shows that RAFA outperforms var-
ious existing frameworks in interactive decision-making tasks, including ALFWorld, BlocksWorld,
Game of 24, and a new benchmark based on Tic-Tac-Toe.
1.1 L ITERATURE
Due to the page limit, we defer the detailed discussion on large language model (LLM), in-context
learning (ICL), and reinforcement learning (RL) under a Bayesian framework to Appendix A.
Reasoning with LLM. We build on a recent line of work that develops various prompting schemes
to improve the reasoning performance of LLMs. “Chain of thoughts” (“CoT”) [67] decomposes
2

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
a challenging problem into several reasoning stages and guides LLMs to solve them one by one.
As generalizations, “tree of thoughts” [73], “graph of thoughts” [74], “algorithm of thoughts” [50],
and “cumulative reasoning” [76] provide different graph-search schemes to guide LLMs. See also
[63, 16, 15]. Also, “reasoning via planning” (“RAP”) [23] emulates the Monte-Carlo tree-search
(MCTS) algorithm to reduce the search complexity. For embodied LLM agents, [25] propose to
decompose a complex task into multiple executable steps. Most of them focus on general reasoning
tasks, e.g., solving a mathematical or logic puzzle, where LLMs generate a detailed trace (trajectory)
of arguments through an internal mechanism to reach a final answer. Here, LLMs play the same
role as the planning subroutine inRAFA. In contrast, we focus on interactive decision-making tasks,
where autonomous LLM agents collect feedbacks from the external environment to optimize actions
iteratively. In particular, we aim to complete a given task within a minimum number of interactions
with the external environment. To this end, it is essential to operate three interleaved modules,
namely learning, planning, and acting, in a closed loop. While it is feasible to incorporate existing
graph-search or MCTS schemes as the planning subroutine for generating trajectories, our core
contribution is a principled framework that executes a selected subset of the planned trajectory to
collect feedbacks (“act for now”) and replans an improved trajectory from the new state by learning
from feedbacks (“reason for future”). From an RL perspective, existing graph-search or MCTS
schemes are analogous to an open-loop method, e.g., motion planning or trajectory optimization
[8], which does not involve interactions with the external environment. To integrate them into a
closed-loop approach, e.g., model predictive control [43], one has to specify how to act given the
planned trajectory and when to reinvoke the reasoning (learning and planning) routine, which is
the key technique of RAFA. Another recent line of work tackles more complex tasks by allowing
LLMs to access various additional modules, e.g., tools, programs, and other learning algorithms
[4, 51, 35, 34, 11], or by finetuning LLMs on the collected feedback [75, 31, 41]. Integrating them
withRAFA is left as a future direction of research.
Acting (and Reasoning) with LLM.We build on a recent line of work that develops various closed-
loop frameworks for interacting with the external environment. “Inner monologue” [26] and “Re-
Act” [72] combine reasoning and acting to refine each other for the first time. In comparison,RAFA
provides a specific schedule for orchestrating reasoning and acting (as discussed above). As gen-
eralizations, “Reflexion” [53] enables autonomous LLM agents to revise the current action of a
pregenerated trajectory by learning from feedbacks, especially when they make mistakes. See also
[28]. However, making a local revision to the pregenerated trajectory is myopic because it fails to
consider the long-term consequence of actions. Consequently, the obtained policy may get trapped
by a local optimum. From an RL perspective, “Reflexion” [53] is an oversimplified version ofRAFA,
where the planning subroutine revises the current action to maximize the reward function (“reason
for now”) instead of planning multiple future steps to maximize the value function (“reason for fu-
ture”), which measures the expected cumulative future reward. To remedy this issue, “AdaPlanner”
[58] regenerates the whole trajectory at each step, which yields a global improvement. See also
[64]. However, the reasoning routine of “AdaPlanner” requires a handcrafted set of programs to
reject suboptimal candidate trajectories. Without the domain knowledge of a specific task, the re-
generated trajectory is not necessarily optimal, i.e., maximizing the value function (up to a certain
error). In contrast, the reasoning routine of RAFA is designed following the principled approach
in RL. In particular, the learning subroutine infers the transition and reward models (model) or/and
the value function (critic), while the planning subroutine emulates the value iteration algorithm, the
random shooting algorithm, or the MCTS algorithm, none of which use any domain knowledge. As
a result, RAFA achieves provable sample efficiency guarantees for the first time and outperforms
those existing frameworks empirically.
2 B RIDGING LLM AND RL
Interaction Protocol. We use Markov decision processes (MDPs) to model how autonomous
LLM agents interact with the external environment. We consider an infinite-horizon MDP M =
(S,A,P,r,ρ,γ ), whereS is the state space, A is the action space, P :S×A7→ ∆(S) is the
transition kernel, r :S×A7→ [0, 1] is the reward function, ρ is the initial distribution of states,
3

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
and γ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor. Here, P gives the probability distribution of the next state
given the current state and action, whiler is assumed to be deterministic without loss of generality.
For notational simplicity, we parameterizeP andr by a shared parameterθ⋆∈ Θ and denote them
asPθ⋆ andrθ⋆. At the t-th step, the LLM agent receives a state st∈S , takes an action at∈A
following the current policyπt :S7→A , and receives a rewardrt =rθ⋆(st,at). Subsequently, the
external environment transits to the next statest+1∼Pθ⋆(·|st,at), while the LLM agent computes
the updated policyπt+1 through an internal mechanism of reasoning (as discussed below). Note that
S andA are represented by tokens in a linguistic system. Here,π∈ Π is assumed to be deterministic
without loss of generality, where Π is the feasible set of policies.
Value Function. For a policy π and a parameter θ of the transition and reward models, we define
the state-value and action-value functions
Vπ
θ (s) = E
h∞X
t=0
γtrθ(st,at)
s0 =s
i
, Q π
θ (s,a ) = E
h∞X
t=0
γtrθ(st,at)
s0 =s,a 0 =a
i
, (2.1)
where E is taken with respect to at = π(st) andst+1∼ Pθ(·|st,at) for allt≥ 0. In other words,
Vπ
θ (andQπ
θ ) gives the expected cumulative future reward from the current states (and actiona). To
define the optimal policy π⋆
θ with respect to a given parameter θ, we define the Bellman optimality
equation as
Q⋆
θ (s,a ) =rθ (s,a ) +γ (PθV⋆
θ ) (s,a ), V ⋆
θ (s) = max
a∈A
Q⋆
θ(s,a ), (2.2)
whereQ⋆
θ andV⋆
θ are the fixed-point solutions Here, we define(PθV⋆
θ )(s,a ) = E[V⋆
θ (s′)], where E
is taken with respect tos′∼Pθ(·|s,a ). Let π⋆
θ(s) = arg maxa∈AQ⋆
θ(s,a ). We define PL⋆ : Θ7→
Π as the planning oracle that mapsθ toπ⋆
θ. See [59] for the existence and uniqueness guarantees for
Q⋆
θ,V⋆
θ , andπ⋆
θ.
Sample Efficiency. Letθ⋆ be the underlying parameter that generates states and rewards. As the
performance metric, we define the Bayesian regret
R(T ) = E
hT−1X
t=0
Vπ⋆
θ⋆ (st)−Vπt
θ⋆ (st)
i
, where π⋆ =PL⋆(θ⋆). (2.3)
Here, E is taken with respect to the prior distribution p0 of θ⋆, the stochastic outcome of st, and
the iterative update of πt, which involves states, actions, and rewards until the t-th step, i.e., the
full historyDt ={(si,ai,si+1,ri)}t−1
i=0. We aim to design a sample-efficient agent that satisfies
R(T ) =o(T ), i.e., the Bayesian regret is sublinear in the total number of interactionsT .
What Reasoning Means and Role of LLM.We formalize reasoning and acting with LLMs under a
Bayesian adaptive MDP framework [19], where the underlying parameterθ⋆ is the latent variable of
interest and the full historyDt (and its linguistic summary) is the information state. In particular, we
aim to design an internal mechanism on top of LLMs that mapsDt to an optimized actionat or the
corresponding policyπt (reasoning), which is executed in the external environment (acting). To this
end, we construct the reasoning routine through two key subroutines, which emulate the learning and
planning algorithms in RL. Specifically, the learning subroutine mapsDt to the posterior distribution
pt ofθ⋆, while the planning subroutine mapspt or a sampled parameterθ∼pt toπt. In other words,
the learning subroutine forms an updated posterior of the unknown environment from the memory
buffer, while the planning subroutine approximates the planning oraclePL⋆. As shown in Section 3,
we invoke the ICL ability of LLMs to achieve the former goal (implicitly), while we design a prompt
template for LLMs to achieve the latter goal (explicitly). Following the principled approach in RL,
we develop a specific schedule for orchestrating reasoning (learning and planning) and acting, which
is proven as sample-efficient in Section 4.
3 A LGORITHM
Architecture of RAFA. By leveraging the LLM-RL correspondence in Section 2, we provide a
principled framework for orchestrating reasoning and acting, namely “reason for future, act for
now” (RAFA), in Algorithms 1 and 2. In Section 4, we present the RL counterpart of RAFA in
Algorithm 3 to illustrate the design rationale and establish the theoretical foundation. At the t-th
step of Algorithm 1, the LLM agent invokes the reasoning routine, which learns from the memory
buffer and plans a future trajectory over a long horizon (“reason for future” in Line 6), takes the
4

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Algorithm 1 Reason for future, act for now (RAFA): The LLM version.
1: input: An LLM learner-planner LLM-LR-PL, which aims at generating an optimal trajectory given an
initial state and returns the initial action (e.g., Algorithm 2), and a switching conditionIf-Switch.
2: initialization: Sample the initial states0∼ρ, sett = 0, and initialize the memory bufferD0 = ∅.
3: fork = 0, 1,..., do
4: Settk←t.
5: repeat
6: Learn and plan given memoryDtk to get actionat←LLM-LR-PL(Dtk,st). (“reason for future”)
7: Execute actionat to receive rewardrt and statest+1 from environment. (“act for now”)
8: Update memoryDt+1←D t∪{ (st,at,st+1,rt)}.
9: Sett←t + 1.
10: untilIf-Switch(Dt) isTrue. (the switching condition is satisfied)
11: end for
initial action of the planned trajectory (“act for now” in Line 7), and stores the collected feedback
(state, action, and reward) in the memory buffer (Line 8). Upon the state transition of the external
environment, the LLM agent reinvokes the reasoning routine to replan another future trajectory from
the new state (Line 6 following Line 9). To ensure the learning and planning stability, we impose
the switching condition (Line 10) to decide whether to incorporate the newest chunk of history, i.e.,
the set differenceDt−D tk, into the information state, which is used in the reasoning routine as
contexts. In other words, the reasoning routine uses the same historyDtk for alltk≤t<t k+1 until
the (k + 1)-th switch at the (tk+1− 1)-th step, which guarantees that the posterior distribution and
the optimized action or the corresponding policy are updated in a conservative manner. We specify
the switching condition in Sections 4 and 5.
“Reason for Future” (Line 6 in Algorithm 1 and Lines 3-11 in Algorithm 2).As detailed below,
the reasoning routine composes the learning and planning subroutines to map the full history Dtk
(until thetk-th step) to an optimized actionat. Note that the reasoning routine does not interact with
the external environment throughout the learning and planning subroutines.
• The learning subroutine (Lines 3-4 in Algorithm 2) maps Dtk to a transition kernel ( Model)
and a value function (Critic), which are used in the planning subroutine. Intuitively, we prompt
LLMs to form an updated posterior of the unknown environment from the memory buffer. Here,
the updated posterior is instantiated by Model and Critic, which estimate their ground-truth
counterparts in association with the data-generating parameter. From an RL perspective (Sections 2
and 4), the learning subroutine mapsDtk to the posterior distributionpt of the underlying parameter
θ⋆, which generates states and rewards, and returns the transition kernel Pθ and the value function
Vπt
θ , whereθ∼pt is the sampled parameter andπt is the current policy. On the other hand, the ICL
ability of LLMs allows us to bypass the posterior update ofpt, samplingθ frompt, and the explicit
parameterization ofPθ andVπt
θ in RL. Instead, we representPθ andVπt
θ using two LLM instances
with specially designed prompts, which instruct them to use Dtk as contexts to generate the next
state and evaluate a given trajectory or the corresponding policy. As Dtk accumulates a growing
collection of feedbacks from the external environment, it reduces the posterior uncertainty about the
unknown environment, which yields more accurate versions ofModel andCritic. Consequently,
the planning subroutine is able to use them to assess the long-term outcome of actions with a higher
accuracy. Depending on whether we emulate the model-based or model-free approach of RL, we
may choose to emulateModel orCritic individually. For illustration, we consider a deterministic
setting of transitions and rewards with discrete state and action spaces, where we emulate both of
them in a tree-search example.
• The planning subroutine (Lines 5-11 in Algorithm 2) maps Model andCritic to a future tra-
jectory (s†
0,a†
0,...,s †
U,a†
U), wheres†
0 is the current statest anda†
0 is executed in the external envi-
ronment as the current action at during the acting phase. Intuitively, we prompt LLMs to generate
an optimal policy (actor) for multiple future steps, which maximizes the value function (Critic).
From an RL perspective (Sections 2 and 4), the planning subroutine approximates the planning or-
acle PL⋆, which maps a given parameter θ to the optimal policy π⋆
θ or the corresponding action
at = π⋆
θ(st). As two LLM instances from the learning subroutine, Model and Critic instanti-
ate the transition kernel Pθ and the value function Vπt
θ in association with the sampled parameter
5

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Algorithm 2 The LLM learner-planner (LLM-LR-PL): A tree-search example. (the deterministic case)
1: input: The memory bufferD, the initial states, the search breadthB, and the search depthU.
2: initialization: Initialize the state arrayS0←{s} and the action arrayA0← ∅.
———————————————— (the learning subroutine) ———————————–
3: SetModel as an LLM instance prompted to useD as contexts to generate the next state.
4: SetCritic as an LLM instance prompted to useD as contexts to estimate the value function.
———————————————— (the planning subroutine) ———————————–
5: SetElite as an LLM instance prompted to useD as contexts to generate multiple candidate actions.
6: foru = 0,...,U do
7: For each current state inSu, invokeElite to generateB candidate actions and store them inAu.
8: For each candidate action inAu, invokeModel to generate the next state and store it inSu+1.
9: end for
10: For all resulting rollouts inS0×A 0×···×S U×AU , invokeCritic to evaluate the expected cumulative
future reward and select the best one (s†
0,a †
0,...,s †
U,a †
U ), wheres†
0 =s.
11: output: The initial actiona†
0 of the selected rollout.
θ∼ pt (as discussed above). Hence, we are able to simulate a given number of trajectories with
Model, evaluate them withCritic, and obtain an improved policy, which is achieved by specially
designed prompts instead of a numerical algorithm. By maximizing the expected cumulative future
reward (instead of the immediate reward), the planning subroutine returns an optimized action that
improves the long-term outcome. In Section 4, we identify two error sources that affect the planning
subroutine, namely the posterior uncertainty, which is inherited from Model and Critic due to
the finite size ofDtk, and the planning suboptimality, which is induced by the limited capacity for
computation, e.g., the bounded width and depth of tree-search (Lines 6-9 in Algorithm 2). Depend-
ing on the specific configuration of the state and action spaces (continuous versus discrete) and the
transition and reward models (stochastic versus deterministic), we may choose to emulate the value
iteration algorithm, the random shooting algorithm, or the Monte-Carlo tree-search algorithm. All of
them allowRAFA to achieve provable sample efficiency guarantees as long as they satisfy a specific
requirement of optimality (Definition 4.2). For illustration, we emulate the tree-search algorithm
and defer its stochastic variant to Appendix B.
“Act for Now” (Lines 7-10 in Algorithm 1). At the current state st, the LLM agent executes
the optimized action at in the external environment, which is obtained from the reasoning routine.
Specifically, we take the initial actiona†
0 of the planned trajectory (s†
0,a†
0,...,s †
U,a†
U), wheres†
0 =
st anda†
0 = at, and discard the remaining subset. At the next state st+1, the LLM agent replans
another future trajectory (s†
0,a†
0,...,s †
U,a†
U) with s†
0 = st+1 and a†
0 = at+1. In other words,
the acting phase follows a short-term subset of the long-term plan, which is regenerated at every
new state. The LLM agent stores the collected feedback (st,at,rt,st+1) in the memory buffer
Dt and queries a switching condition If-Switch to decide when to update the information state
Dtk⊆D t, which is used in the reasoning routine as contexts for learning and planning. Intuitively,
we incorporate the newest chunk of history Dt−D tk to improve the current policy only in the
case that it carries significant novel information, e.g., when the LLM agent loses for the first time
following a winning streak. In Section 4, we provide a principled implementation of the switching
condition, which measures the posterior uncertainty givenDt with entropy and compares it against
that givenDtk. From an RL perspective, the lazy update ensures the learning and planning stability
and plays a pivotal role in the regret analysis. In Section 5, we develop several practical variants that
achieve superior empirical performance.
4 T HEORY
We establish provable sample efficiency guarantees forRAFA (Algorithms 1 and 2) through its RL
counterpart (Algorithm 3 in Appendix B). In Line 6 of Algorithm 3, the reasoning routine forms an
updated posterior of the unknown environment (learning) and generates an optimized action from
an improved policy (planning), mirroringRAFA. Here, we emulate the model-based approach of RL
and cast RAFA as a Thompson sampling (TS) method. The following assumption and definition
formalize the learning and planning subroutines ofRAFA (Lines 3-4 and 5-11 in Algorithm 2).
6

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Learning. Let LLMD,g be an LLM instance with D as contexts and g as instructions to perform
a specific task. Specifically, g† prompts LLMs to predict the next state s′ and the received reward
r from the current state s and the current action a, i.e., LLMD,g† :S×A→S× [0, 1], where
the generated state is stochastic. We denote the Markov kernel in association with LLMD,g† as
PLLMD,g† (s′,r|s,a ). Also, we denote the posterior distribution of the transition and reward models
as Pmodel(Pθ,rθ|D).
Assumption 4.1 (LLMs Perform Implicit Bayesian Inference). The Markov kernelPLLMD,g† follows
the posterior distribution Pmodel(·|D).
Assumption 4.1 states that LLMs perform implicit Bayesian inference, which is verified both the-
oretically and empirically as the underlying mechanism of ICL [69, 77, 78, 62, 68, 27, 30]. In
particular, [69, 62] validate it in a general setting for generating texts, while [30] prove it in the imi-
tation setting of RL to develop a new framework for pretrained decision transformers. We consider
a related setting for predicting states and rewards that are described by texts. Here, the pretrain-
ing dataset is a general-purpose corpus covering a wide variety of D andg, whereas (Pθ,rθ) orθ
is the latent concept of interest. In comparison, [30] consider the imitation setting for predicting
the optimal action without an explicit planner, where the pretraining dataset contains the numerical
trajectory labeled by experts. In Appendix D, we prove that Assumption 4.1 holds for a specific
parameterization of (Pθ,rθ) under three regularity conditions, namely (a) LLMs are trained to repli-
cate the pretraining distribution, which is assumed in [48, 66, 69] to simplify the statistical analysis,
(b) the pretraining dataset is generated through a Bayesian mechanism with a latent concept, which
is a simplified version of the latent variable model in [69] and resembles that in [62], and (c) LLMs
are able to parameterize an implicit Bayesian inference mechanism, which is proved in [77, 78] for
the attention architecture. Note that, if Assumption 4.1 holds approximately, the regret analysis can
be relaxed to accommodate the additional error in the posterior distribution.
Planning. Assumption 4.1 allows us to bridge RAFA and TS. In the learning subroutine of RAFA,
we emulate Pθ with Model (Line 3 in Algorithm 2) and Vπ
θ with Critic (Line 4 in Algorithm
2), which is determined by Pθ,rθ, and π. At the t-th step, θ is sampled from pt, i.e., the updated
posterior given the full history Dtk (until the tk-th step). To formalize the planning subroutine of
RAFA, we define the planning suboptimality. Recall that Θ is the parameter space, Π is the policy
space, andPL⋆ is the planning oracle, which is defined in Section 2.
Definition 4.2 (ϵ-Optimality of Planner) . A planning algorithm PLϵ : Θ 7→ Π is an ϵ-optimal
planner if maxs∈S[V PL⋆(θ)
θ (s)−V PLϵ(θ)
θ (s)]≤ϵ for allθ∈ Θ.
As a special case of Definition 4.2, we present the value iteration algorithm in Appendix F, where
we use a truncated horizon U, i.e., a finite length of the lookahead window. Here, ϵ decreases asU
increases. See a detailed discussion in Appendix C.1.
Switching. We consider an implementation of the switching condition (Line 10 in Algorithms 1 and
3). Let H(p) be the differential entropy ofp. We define the posterior entropy givenDt as
Ht = H(pt) =−
Z
Θ
pt(θ)· logpt(θ)dθ. (4.1)
As long as Htk−Ht > log 2, i.e., the memory buffer accumulates one extra bit of information,
we incorporateDt−D tk into the information state and use it to improve the current policy. The
switching condition ensures that πt is switched for a logarithmic number of times, which is a key
step in establishing the sublinear regret. Intuitively, the lazy update of policies ensures the learning
and planning stability. On the other hand, calculating the posterior entropy is challenging in practice.
In Section 5, we develop several practical variants that achieve superior empirical performance.
Regret. We define the information ratio to characterize the tail behavior of the posterior distribution
[1, 40, 46, 45, 47, 36]. Let δ∈ (0, 1) be the confidence level, DT ={(st,at,st+1,rt)}T−1
t=0 be
an arbitrary dataset collected in the underlying MDP, and {Vt}T−1
t=0 be a value function sequence
adapted to{σ(Dt)}T−1
t=0 , whereσ(Dt) is the sigma-algebra ofDt⊆D T . We define the information
gain asI(θ;ξt+1|Dt) =Ht−Ht+1. Here,ξt+1 denotes (st,at,st+1,rt) andHt is defined in (4.1),
wherept is the posterior distribution givenDt.
7

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Model LLMElite LLM
Env
Reasoning
Acting
Input: 2 5 8 11
2*5
2+5
11-5
2*5=10
(left: 8 10 11)
2+5=7
(left: 7 8 11)
11-5=6
(left: 2 6 8)
11-5
8/6
2*2
8-2
Env
2*2
11-5=6
(left: 2 6 8)
11-5=6
(left: 2 6 8)
8/6
8-6
8/2
8/6=1.33
(left: 2 1.33)
8-6=2
(left: 2 2)
8/2=4
(left: 4 6)
6-4
4*6
4+6
LikelyCritic LLM
Impossible
Impossible
I repeatedly
used 2. 2*2=4:
Impossible
Likely
Impossible
Impossible
8/6=1.33
(left: 2 1.33)
2*2=4
(left: 4 6)
8-2=6
(left: 6 6)
6/4=2
(left: 2)
4*6=24
(left: 24)
4+6=10
(left: 10)
8/2
4-6=24
(left: 24)
4*6
8/2=4
(left: 4 6)
Env
Env
Reasoning
Acting
Figure 2: RAFA for
Game of 24. Actions
are proposed (dotted)
and selected (green).
Hallucinations that the
same number can be
reused are mitigated
through interactions.
Definition 4.3 (Information Ratio). The information ratio Γt†(δ) is the smallest number for which,
ifHt†−Ht≤ log 2, then it holds for allt∈{t†,...,T − 1} with probability at least 1−δ that(rθ⋆−rθt† )(st,at) +

(Pθ⋆−Pθt† )Vt

(st,at)
≤ Γt†(δ)·
p
I(θ;ξt+1|Dt), (4.2)
whereθ⋆ is the data-generating parameter andθt†∼pt† is a sampled parameter.
Definition 4.3 quantifies the estimation error of the sampled parameterθt† in terms of approximating
the data-generating parameter θ⋆. To achieve this, we use the information gain I(θ;ξt+1|Dt) as
a benchmarking quantity. Intuitively, the information ratio Γt†(δ) characterizes how exploration
reduces uncertainty. See a detailed discussion in Appendix C.2.
We characterize the Bayesian regret of Algorithm 1 by connecting it to Algorithm 3. Recall that the
Bayesian regret is defined in (2.3) andγ∈ (0, 1) is the discount factor.
Theorem 4.4 (Bayesian Regret). Under Assumption 4.1, the Bayesian regret ofRAFA satisfies
R(T ) =O
γ· supt†<T Γt†(δ)· E[√H0−HT ]
1−γ ·
√
T + γδ
(1−γ)2·T +ϵ·T + γ· E[H0−HT ]
(1−γ)2

.
We provide the proof in Appendix E. Theorem 4.4 establishes the
√
T regret ofRAFA (Algorithms
1 and 3) for a proper choice of the confidence level δ and the planning suboptimality ϵ, e.g., δ =
O(1/
√
T ) and ϵ = O(1/
√
T ). Here, the first term in the upper bound in Theorem 4.4 is the
leading term and involves several multiplicative factors, namely the effective horizon 1/(1−γ),
the information ratio Γt†(δ), and the information gain H0−HT throughout theT steps, which are
common in the RL literature [1, 40, 46, 45, 47, 36]. In particular,H0 highlights the prior knowledge
obtained through pretraining, as H0 quantifies the prior uncertainty of LLMs before incorporating
any collected feedback. Hence,H0−HT highlights the uncertainty reduction achieved by reasoning
and acting, as HT quantifies the posterior uncertainty of LLMs after incorporating the collected
feedback. In Appendix F, we prove that H0−HT =O(d· logT ) for linear kernel MDPs, which
implies R(T ) = eO(
√
T ). Here eO hides the logarithmic factor.
5 E XPERIMENT
We evaluateRAFA in several text-based benchmarks, e.g., Game of 24, ALFWorld, BlocksWorld,
and Tic-Tac-Toe. The detailed setups, results, and ablations are provided in Appendix G, while the
detailed prompts are found in Appendix H.
5.1 G AME OF 24
3 6 9 12 15 18
Step
0
20
40
60
80
100Success Rate (%)
Game of 24, gpt-4
RAFA(b = 1)
RAFA(b = 2)
Reflexion
ToT(b = 1, 20 trials)
ToT(b = 2, 20 trials)
3 6 9 12 15 18
Step
0
10
20
30
40
50Success Rate (%)
Game of 24, gpt-3.5-turbo
RAFA(b = 1)
RAFA(b = 2)
Reflexion
ToT(b = 1, 20 trials)
ToT(b = 2, 20 trials)
Figure 3: Sample efficiency on Game of 24.
Game of 24 [73] is a mathematical puzzle to ob-
tain 24 from four natural numbers through basic
arithmetic operations. The state is the (possibly
unfinished) current formula and the action is the
next formula (or the modified part).
Setup. We emulate the tree-search algorithm to plan (B∈{ 1, 2}). At the t-th step, RAFA learns
from the memory buffer and switches to a new policy upon receiving an unexpected reward, which
is the switching condition. After the t-th step,RAFA digests the collected feedback and generates a
linguistic summary, which is saved into the memory buffer to avoid similar previous mistakes.
Result. RAFA attains SOTA performances as shown in Table 1. RAFA achieves superior sample
efficiency by mitigating hallucinations and avoid careless trials (Figures 2 and 3).
8

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
gpt-4gpt-3.5
RAFA (B = 1) 89% 29%
RAFA (B = 2) 93% 46%
ToT (B = 1) 73% 10%
ToT (B = 2) 81% 17%
Reflexion 21% 16%
Table 1: Game of 24 results.
Pick Clean Heat Cool Exam Pick2 Total
BUTLER 46.00 39.00 74.00 100.00 22.00 24.00 37.00
ReAct 66.67 41.94 91.03 80.95 55.56 35.29 61.94
AdaPlanner 100.00 96.77 95.65 100.00 100.00 47.06 91.79
Reflexion 100.00 90.32 82.61 90.48 100.00 94.12 92.54
RAFA 100.00 96.77 100.00 100.00 100.00 100.00 99.25
Table 2: ALFWorld results (success rates %).
5.2 ALFW ORLD
ALFWorld [54] is an interactive environment for embodied agent simulations, which encompasses
134 household tasks in six overall categories (Table 2). We usegpt-3 (text-davinci-003).
Setup. We emulate the tree-search algorithm to plan (B = 2). RAFA invokesCritic to evaluate
the completed portion of the desired goal and switches to a new policy after20 consecutive failures.
0 2 4 6 8 10
Episode
64
72
80
88
96Success Rate (%)
ALFWorld, gpt-3 for RAFA
RAFA
Reflexion
AdaPlanner
ReAct
Result. RAFA outperforms various existing frameworks (right figure).
The better performance of AdaPlanner at the initial episode is at-
tributed to a handcrafted set of programs for rejecting suboptimal can-
didate trajectories, which is challenging to construct without the domain
knowledge of a specific task. One such example is the PickTwo category.
5.3 B LOCKSWORLD
BlocksWorld [23] is a rearrangement puzzle. For the RAFA algorithm, we use the Vicuna [79]
model and emulate the MCTS algorithm to plan (see Figure 16 in Appendix). RAFA achieves su-
perior success rates across multiple Vicuna versions (Figure 4). Comparisons with CoT andRAP
demonstrate how the learning subroutine improves the planning optimality.
0 15 30 45 60
Step
0
20
40
60
80
100Success Rate (%)
BlocksWorld (4-step), Vicuna-13B
RAFA
RAP(trial=10)
RAP(trial=20)
0 15 30 45 60
Step
0
20
40
60
80
100Success Rate (%)
BlocksWorld (4-step), Vicuna-33B
RAFA
CoT(gpt-4)
CoT(LLaMA-33B)
RAP(trial=10)
RAP(trial=20)
0 15 30 45 60
Step
0
20
40
60
80
100Success Rate (%)
BlocksWorld (6-step), Vicuna-13B
RAFA
CoT(gpt-4)
RAP(trial=10)
RAP(trial=20)
CoT(LLaMA-33B)
0 15 30 45 60
Step
0
20
40
60
80
100Success Rate (%)
BlocksWorld (6-step), Vicuna-33B
RAFA
CoT(gpt-4)
CoT(LLaMA-33B)
Figure 4: Sample efficiency on BlocksWorld (4 and 6 are the minimum numbers of steps for solving a specific
task). CoT is prompted by four in-context examples.
5.4 T IC-TAC-TOE
Tic-Tac-Toe [7] is a competitive game where the X and O sides take turns to place marks. RAFA
invokesModel to simulate the transition and opponent dynamics (see Figure 17 in Appendix).
Setup. We usegpt-4 and emulate the tree-search algorithm to plan (B∈{ 3, 4}). RAFA switches
to a new policy when (a) the predicted state differs from the observed one, (2) the predicted action
of opponents differs from the observed one, or (3)Critic gives the wrong prediction of the game
status. Here, X has an asymmetric advantage (winning surely if played properly).
O X gpt-4
gpt-4 90%, 0%, 10%
RAFA(T = 1) 90%, 0%, 10%
RAFA(T = 5) 50%, 0%, 50%
RAFA(T = 7) 0%, 0%, 100%
Table 3: Tic-Tac-Toe Results. We
set B = 4 and report the winning
rate of X, the tie rate, and the win-
ning rate of O.
0 2 4 6 8 10
Episode
−0.9
−0.6
−0.3
0.0
0.3
0.6
0.9
Score
Tic-Tac-Toe (Player O), gpt-4
RAFA(B = 3)
RAFA(B = 4)
Figure 5: Sample effi-
ciency on Tic-Tac-Toe ( 0
means tie).
Result. RAFA (playing O) matches
and beatsgpt-4 forT = 5 andT =
7 (Table 3), although O is destined to
lose. The ablation study (B = 3 ver-
susB = 4) illustrates how the plan-
ning suboptimality affects the sample
efficiency (Figure 5).
6 C ONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we establish the LLM-RL correspondence and propose a principled frameworkRAFA
for orchestrating reasoning and acting, which achieves provable sample efficiency guarantees in
autonomous LLM agents for the first time. RAFA’s outstanding empirical performance underscores
its potential for autonomous and adaptive decision-making in various complex environments, which
we remain for future work.
9

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
