record_id: openreview:6LNTSrJjBe
source_used: openreview_pdf
fetched_url: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=6LNTSrJjBe
fetched_title: LANGUAGE AGENT TREE SEARCH UNIFIES REASON - ING ACTING AND PLANNING IN LANGUAGE MODELS
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:08:46Z

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
LANGUAGE AGENT TREE SEARCH UNIFIES REASON -
ING ACTING AND PLANNING IN LANGUAGE MODELS
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
ABSTRACT
While large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated impressive performance
on a range of decision-making tasks, they rely on simple acting processes and
fall short of broad deployment as autonomous agents. We introduce LATS (Lan-
guage Agent Tree Search), a general framework that synergizes the capabilities
of LLMs in planning, acting, and reasoning. Drawing inspiration from Monte
Carlo tree search commonly used in model-based reinforcement learning, LATS
employs LLMs as agents, value functions, and optimizers, repurposing their la-
tent strengths for enhanced decision-making. What is crucial in this method is
the use of an environment for external feedback, which offers a more deliberate
and adaptive problem-solving mechanism that moves beyond the limitations of
existing techniques. Our experimental evaluation across diverse domains, such as
programming, HotPotQA, and WebShop, illustrates the applicability of LATS for
decision-making while maintaining competitive reasoning performance. In partic-
ular, LATS achieves 94.4% for programming on HumanEval with GPT-4 and an
average score of 75.9 for web browsing on WebShop with GPT-3.5, demonstrating
the effectiveness and generality of our method.
1 I NTRODUCTION
General autonomous agents capable of reasoning and decision-making in a variety of environments
(Wooldridge & Jennings, 1995) have been of longstanding interest in the field of artificial intelli-
gence. While this has traditionally been studied in reinforcement learning, the recent rise of large
language models (LLMs) (Brown et al., 2020; Chowdhery et al., 2022; Touvron et al., 2023; Ope-
nAI, 2023) with strong reasoning and general adaptability offers an alternative paradigm. Not only
have LLMs excelled on standard NLP tasks such as text summarization (Nallapati et al., 2016) or
natural language inference (Bowman et al., 2015), but they have been adapted to an increasingly di-
verse set of tasks that often require advanced common-sense reasoning or quantitative skills (Cobbe
et al., 2021; Saparov & He, 2022). LLMs are also capable of performing in complex environments
that involve knowledge and reasoning, such as web navigation (Yao et al., 2022; Deng et al., 2023),
tool-use (Schick et al., 2023), or open-ended games (Fan et al., 2022).
LLM Agent
Context
Memory
Evaluation /
Self-reflection
Tree Search
Environment
ActionsObs / Reward
Best NodeValues
Figure 1: An overview of LATS. LATS uses an ex-
ternal environment and self-reflection to improve
reasoning and decision-making. Prior states, val-
ues, and reflections are stored in external memory.
Reasoning and acting abilities have also been
improved by prompting techniques that aug-
ment LLMs with feedback or observations from
an external environment (Yao et al., 2023b; Gao
et al., 2022; Shinn et al., 2023). This elimi-
nates the need to rely entirely on the base abil-
ities of the Language Model (LM), enhancing
it through external tools or semantic feedback.
Despite this strength, these methods are reflex-
ive and fall short of humans’ deliberate and
thoughtful decision-making characteristics to
solve problems (Sloman, 1996; Evans, 2010).
In particular, such methods fail to consider mul-
tiple reasoning paths or to plan ahead. Recent
search-guided LLM works (Xie et al., 2023;
Yao et al., 2023a; Hao et al., 2023) address this
1

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Approach Reasoning Acting Planning Self External
Reflection Memory
CoT (Wei et al., 2022) ✓ × × × ×
ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b) ✓ ✓ × × ×
ToT (Yao et al., 2023a) ✓ × ✓ ✓ ✓
RAP (Hao et al., 2023) ✓ × ✓ × ✓
Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2023) ✓ × × ✓ ×
Beam Search (Xie et al., 2023) ✓ × × ✓ ×
Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) ✓ ✓ × ✓ ✓
LATS (Ours) ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Table 1: A summary of related work on reasoning, acting, and planning. LATS is the first work
incorporating designs from all three domains, allowing use in all corresponding tasks.We refer to
planning as the use of a search algorithm, self-reflection as the use of LM-generated feedback, and
external memory as storaging past text context for future updates of solution.
issue by searching over multiple reasoning chains. While these methods enable planning, these
methods operate in isolation and do not incorporate external feedback that can improve reasoning.
To help address these issues, we propose LATS (Language Agent Tree Search), a general framework
for decision-making and reasoning with language models. LATS unifies LM planning, acting, and
reasoning strategies by expanding ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b) into a search over a combinatorial
space of possible reasoning and acting steps. We adapt Monte Carlo tree search (MCTS) from
model-based reinforcement learning (Silver et al., 2017; Anthony et al., 2017; Jiang et al., 2018) to
language agents, repurposing a pretrained LLM as an agent, value function, and optimizer. Utilizing
the strong natural language understanding and in-context learning ability of modern LMs, we use
text as an interface between each component of the framework, allowing LATS to adapt planning
to environmental conditions without additional training. To the best of our knowledge, LATS is the
first framework that combines reasoning, acting, and planning to enhance LLMs . Notably, LATS
doubles the performance of GPT-3.5 on HotPotQA (Yang et al., 2018) over ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b)
and raises the average score by 22.1 on WebShop (Yao et al., 2022). When used with GPT-4, LATS
achieves a 94.4 Pass@1 rate for programming on HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021), setting the state
of the art. To summarize, our contributions are the following:
• We introduce an LM-based Monte Carlo tree search variant to deliberately construct the
best trajectory from sampled actions, enabling more flexible and adaptive problem-solving
compared to reflexive prompting methods. This is guided by heuristics from the LM.
• By integrating external feedback and self-reflection, LATS enhances model sensibility and
enables agents to learn from experience, surpassing reasoning-based search methods.
• Through experiments across diverse domains like programming, interactive QA, and web
navigation, we demonstrate the versatility of LATS in harnessing LLMs for autonomous
reasoning and decision-making.
2 R ELATED WORK
LLMs for reasoning. For LLMs, reasoning typically involves decomposing complex inputs into
sequential intermediate steps towards a final answer (Cobbe et al., 2021), demonstrated with Chain-
of-Thought (CoT) prompting (Wei et al., 2022) and its variants (Wei et al., 2022; Kojima et al., 2022;
Wang et al., 2022). However, these methods, which create chains autoregressively in a single step,
often suffer from error propagation as the number of steps increases (Guo et al., 2018; Chen et al.,
2022b) due to compound errors. Various advancements aim to mitigate this issue; some approaches,
such as Self-Consistency (Wang et al., 2022), employ majority voting over sampled chains, while
others focus on multi-step decomposition, such as least-to-most prompting (Zhou et al., 2022), or
use of external tools such as a scratchpad (Nye et al., 2021) or compiler (Gao et al., 2022). Recently,
CoT has been improved with search algorithms (Yao et al., 2023a; Hao et al., 2023; Besta et al.,
2023) that can sample trajectories more effectively. Tree-of-thought (ToT) prompting (Yao et al.,
2023a) uses DFS or BFS-based search guided by an LM-generated heuristic while Reasoning via
Planning (RAP) (Hao et al., 2023) uses MCTS with rollouts simulated by the LM. However, they
rely solely on LM internal knowledge and cannot adapt to useful external feedback.
2

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
S1 S1S1
S2 S2 S2 S2
S3 S3 S3 S3 S3
…
Output
Observation
Action
Reward
Thought
Input
a) Tree-of-Thoughts
Input
S1 S1
S2 S2 S2
S3
S2
S3
…
Output
S3 S3
Output
… b) Reasoning via Planning
Input
S1 S1
S2 S2 S2
S3
S2
S3
…
Output
S3 S3
Output
…
EnvironmentReflection c) Language Agent Tree Search
Figure 2: An overview of the differences between LATS and recently proposed LM search algo-
rithms ToT (Yao et al., 2023a) and RAP (Hao et al., 2023). LATS leverages environmental feedback
and self-reflection to further adapt search and improve performance.
LLMs for acting. The strong reasoning and common-sense abilities of LLMs have also been
adapted for decision-making or acting tasks as a policy model in interactive environments. In the
realm of robotics LLMs have been employed as high-level controllers of control policies (Ahn et al.,
2022; Huang et al., 2022; Driess et al., 2023). Similar work (Baker et al., 2022; Wang et al., 2023;
Zhu et al., 2023) has also adapted LLM agents to complex multimodal games such as Minecraft
(Guss et al., 2019; Fan et al., 2022). LLMs are particularly useful in text-based environments (Liu
et al., 2018; Shridhar et al., 2020; Liu et al., 2023), where acting-based prompting techniques such
as ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b) have seen success. Similar to CoT, ReAct is limited by its simplicity
and cannot effectively adapt to environment conditions. Many extensions have been proposed to ad-
dress this, including Self-refine (Madaan et al., 2023) and Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023; Yao et al.,
2023c), which uses self-reflection to enhance reasoning and decision-making, and AdaPlanner (Sun
et al., 2023), which incorporates both positive and negative environmental feedback. However these
methods focus on refining an individual plan or trajectory and do not consider alternative choices
at each step. In addition, recent work (Huang et al., 2023) has suggested LLMs cannot self-correct
their internal reasoning, making it critical to use external feedback. Alternatively to pure decision-
making environments, the reasoning and practical abilities of LLMs have been enhanced by access
to external tools, such as APIs, search engines, calculators, or other models (Schick et al., 2023;
Shen et al., 2023; Sur´ıs et al., 2023). Contrary to reasoning-based approaches, these methods have
not been improved with planning, limiting their effectiveness. We summarize them in Tab. 1.
Tree-based search. Tree-based search, where multiple branches of outcomes are explored during
search, is widely used in many planning algorithms (´Swiechowski et al., 2023; LaValle et al., 2001)
and Reinforcement Learning (RL) (Hafner et al., 2019; Du et al., 2023; Wu et al., 2023) algorithms
for its good exploration-exploitation trade-off. Though tree-based search requires an environment
model that can expand from arbitrary state (V odopivec et al., 2017), which often requires extra
training in RL (Hafner et al., 2023), such problem does not exist for LM tasks as we can conveniently
backup to any state by setting the input to be the context and corresponding previous output by the
LM. Thus, we work on the tree-based framework and use MCTS (´Swiechowski et al., 2023) to fully
release the potential of LMs, while avoiding the cost of training a value function over language
descriptions by leveraging the in-context learning (Brown et al., 2020) abilities of LLMs.
3 P RELIMINARIES
3.1 P ROBLEM SETTING AND PROMPTING
Before describing LATS, we first define our problem and outline a few established methods that
leverage large language models for reasoning or decision-making. In LM reasoning or decision mak-
3

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
ing, we are given an inputx in natural language and a pretrained language model pθ(x) parameter-
ized byθ; our goal is to generate a final outputy∼pθ(x) corresponding to the answer (reasoning) or
completes the task (decision-making). Bothx andy are language sequences, which are comprised of
a list oftokens (the basic elements of natural language, often words), denoted asx = (x[1],...,x [n])
andy = (y[1],...,y [n]). The LM decodes text autoregressively, i.e., without other inputs, the prob-
ability for an LM to generate a sequencex is given bypθ(x) = Qn
i=1pθ(x[i]|x[1...i −1]). Usually,
to improve the LM, prompts are provided along with the input x, which are specific instructions or
few-shot input-output examples. We denote the generic process where an inputx is transformed into
an outputy by LM:y∼pθ(y|promptIO (x)), where promptIO (x) denotes the inputx.
Chain-of-thought (CoT) Prompting (Wei et al., 2022) was introduced to cater to scenarios where
direct mapping fromx toy is intricate, such as whenx is from a mathematical query or challenging
question. This method hinges on creating thoughtsz1,...,z n that act as stepping stones betweenx
andy; each thought zi is a language sequence. To employ CoT prompting, thoughts are extracted
sequentially aszi∼pCoT
θ (zi|x,z 1···i−1), with the final output beingy∼pCoT
θ (y|x,z 1···n).
Tree-of-thought (ToT) Prompting (Yao et al., 2023a) extends CoT prompting by exploring mul-
tiple reasoning paths over thoughts. It frames problems as a search over a tree where each node
s = [x,z 1·i] represents a partial solution state comprising the original inputx and thought sequence
z1···i. Thoughts zi are generated by proposal or sampling with CoT zi∼pCoT
θ (zi|x,z 1···i−1). De-
liberate search algorithms like breadth-first or depth-first search are used to systematically explore
the tree, guided by heuristics based on language model evaluationsV (s) of each state.
Reasoning via Planning (RAP) (Hao et al., 2023) is similar to ToT, except that MCTS is used over
DFS or BFS. Heuristics are designed from an LM, such as the likelihood or confidence of an action,
and the LM is used as a world model to predict subsequent states during the simulation step.
ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b) extends language models to tasks where the mapping from x toy is en-
hanced by or requires interactions with an external environment, such as a game or API. This tech-
nique constructs an action space ˆA =A∪Z that adds permissible actionsa to the reasoning traces
z from CoT. Observationso from the environment are used to improve both reasoning and acting.
To solve problems with ReAct, after each observation, actions are generated frompθ sequentially as
ai∼pReAct
θ (ai|x,o 1···i−1,a 1···i−1), with the final output beingy∼pReAct
θ (y|x,o 1···n,a 1···n).
While the previously described prompting techniques improve LM performance on reasoning tasks,
they falter on difficult tasks that involve multifaceted decision-making due to several shortcomings:
1) Flexibility: Base prompting methods (CoT or ReAct) autoregressively sample from the LM, ne-
glecting potential alternative continuations from specific states. 2) Sensibility: Reasoning-based
methods (CoT, RAP, or ToT) rely solely on the internal representations of the LM and cannot con-
sider external observations. This dependency risks fact hallucination and error propagation while
setting a performance ceiling. 3) Adaptability: Current planning frameworks (RAP or ToT) use sim-
ple search algorithms such as BFS or cannot leverage environmental feedback to improve planning.
Additionally, the agent is static and cannot reuse previous experience or learn from trial and error.
While RAP also adopts MCTS, it is constrained to tasks where the LM can become a world model
and accurately predict states. These shortcomings limit the ability of LMs to be deployed as general
problem-solving agents and form the motivation for LATS.
3.2 M ONTE -CARLO TREE SEARCH (MCTS)
Monte-Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) is a heuristic search algorithm that is proved successful on many
decision-making environments such as Atari (Ye et al., 2021) and Go (Silver et al., 2016). MCTS
builds a decision tree where every node in the tree is a state and edge is an action. MCTS runs
fork episodes; for each episode, it starts from the root (i.e., initial state) and iteratively conducts
two steps to expand the tree: 1) Expansion, where multiple children states s are explored from the
current parent state p by sampling n actions, and 2) Selection, where the children with the highest
UCT (Upper Confidence bounds applied to Trees) (Kocsis & Szepesv´ari, 2006) value is selected by
the next iteration. The UCT of a child states is calculated as follows:
UCT (s) = V (s) +w
s
lnN (p)
N (s) , (1)
4

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
S2 S2
S3 S3
Output
…
4) Simulation
S1 S1
S2 S2
S3 S3
Output
…
5) Backpropagation
Input
6) Reflection
+
…
Reflection
LM
Input
Output
S
S2 S2
2) Expansion 1) Selection
S1 S1
Input
S1 S1
Input
S1 S1
Input
LM
Value
3) Evaluation
S
Figure 3: An overview of the six operations of LATS. A node is selected, expanded, evaluated,
then simulated until a terminal node is reached, then the resulting value is backpropagated. If
the trajectory fails, a reflection is generated and used as additional context for future trials. These
operations are performed in succession until the budget is reached or task is successful.
whereN (s) is the number of visits to a node s,V (s) is the value function (expected return) from
the subtree of s, w is the exploration weight, and p is the parent node of s. The child node with
the highest UCT value is selected for expansion in the next iteration. When the end of an episode
is reached, a backpropagation is carried out: the return r is used for updating everyV (s) along the
path with the formulaV (s) = Vold(s)(N (s)−1)+r
N (s) , whereVold(s) is the old value function. Normally,
the major shortcoming of MCTS is that it requires an environment model to undo previous steps and
form a searching tree, which is often a strong assumption. However, such a limitation does not exist
for LMs, as we can conveniently reset to any step by simply copy-pasting historical text input. Such
a special property is the key motivation of our work.
4 U NIFYING PLANNING , REASONING , AND ACTING
4.1 LM A GENT
LATS supports sequential reasoning or decision-making tasks on the basis of ReAct. At time stept,
an agent receives an observationot∈O from the environment and takes an actionat∈A following
some policy π(at|x,o 1···i−1,a 1···i−1), where x consists of the task instruction and a number of
few-shot examples. We initialize the agent with pθ to leverage the useful language representations
of an LM as a base decision-maker. We follow the ReAct instantiation in which the action space
ˆA = A∪Z consists of both the space of permissible actions A and language space of reasoning
traces Z. Actions directly affect the environment and result in observation, while thoughts are
used to formalize decisions by organizing information, planning future actions, or injecting internal
knowledge. The exact instantiation of the action space depends on the particular environment; for
decision-making tasks actions might consist of commands on a website while for reasoning tasks
the action space might be limited to a few external tools or APIs.
Instead of greedily decoding one trajectory or solution, we sample n actions from pθ using the
current state. This is based on the intuition that for complex decision-making tasks, there is likely
to be a range of potential trajectories or reasoning paths that are correct (Evans, 2010). Sampling
a diverse set of candidates at each step mitigates the stochastic nature of LM text generation and
enables greater exploration in both the decision-making and reasoning space. We wrap pθ within
our proposed search algorithm to deliberately construct the best trajectory from sampled actions.
5

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
4.2 LATS
The main component of LATS is a search algorithm that controls the overall problem-solving process
with deliberate planning. To find the most promising trajectory and systemically balance exploration
with exploitation, we adopt a variant of Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) that frames decision-
making as a tree search, in which each node s = [x,a 1···i,o 1···i] represents a state comprising the
original inputx, action sequencea1·i, and observation sequenceo1·i.
To adapt MCTS for language agents, LATS repurposespθ as an agent, state evaluator, and feedback
generator, leveraging the useful language priors of modern LMs to facilitate planning. While stan-
dard MCTS and RAP Hao et al. (2023) rely on internal dynamics models to facilitate simulation,
LATS is model-free and uses environment interaction. LATS consists of a series of operations,selec-
tion, expansion, evaluation, simulation, backpropagation, and reflection , performed in succession
until the task is successfully completed or a computational limit is reached. The full psuedocode of
LATS can be found in Sec. A in the Appendix.
Selection. In the first operation, the algorithm identifies a segment of the current tree most suitable
for subsequent expansion. Starting from the root node, denoted as the initial states0, a child node is
selected at each tree level until a leaf node is reached. To balance exploration and exploitation, we
use the UCT algorithm as shown in Eq. 1.
Expansion. After selecting a node, the second operation expands the tree by sampling n actions
frompθ, as described in the prior section. The environment receives each action and returns corre-
sponding feedback as an observation. This results in n new child nodes added to the tree. This tree
is stored in an external long-term memory structure.
Evaluation. The third operation assigns a scalar value to each new child node to be used for selec-
tion and backpropagation. This value effectively quantifies the agent’s progress in task completion,
serving as a heuristic to steer the search algorithm towards the most promising regions of the tree.
Following Yao et al. (2023a) we repurposepθ into a value function by prompting it to reason about
a given state. To obtain a scalar value, we instruct pθ to end its reasoning trace with a score indi-
cating the correctness of the trajectory. This method offers enhanced flexibility over programmed
heuristics (Campbell et al., 2002) and greater efficiency than learned heuristics (Silver et al., 2017).
Simulation. The fourth operation expands the currently selected node until a terminal state is
reached. At each depth level we sample and evaluate nodes with the same operations, but prioritize
nodes of highest value. Reaching a terminal state provides objective feedback on the correctness of
a trajectory. If the task is completed successfully, then LATS terminates the search. If the solution is
partially successful or unsuccessful, then we perform two additional operations as described below.
Backpropagation. This operation updates the values of the tree based on the outcome of a trajectory.
For each node s0,s 1,...,s n in the trajectory from root (initial state s0) of the searching tree to
leaf (terminal state sn), its value is updated to reflect the outcome of the simulation by N (si) =
Nold(si) + 1 andV (si) = r+Nold(si)Vold(si)
N (si) , wherer is the return and Nold,V old are the old number
of visits and value function. These updated values are used in the UCT formula (Eq. 1) to guide the
selection of the next node for exploration.
Reflection. In addition to the environmental feedback, we also leverage self-reflection to further
refine the decision-making process (Shinn et al., 2023; Madaan et al., 2023). Upon encountering an
unsuccessful terminal node, pθ is prompted with the trajectory and final reward to provide a verbal
self-reflection that summarizes the errors in the reasoning or acting process and proposes superior
alternatives. We store both failed trajectories and corresponding reflections in the memory. In sub-
sequent iterations, these are integrated as additional context to the agent and value function, refining
both through in-context learning. This imparts a semantic gradient signal more useful than a scalar
value, enabling the agent to learn from trial and error without the cost of expensive optimization
processes such as reinforcement learning.
Conceptually, LATS has the following advantages as a general framework for reasoning and
decision-making with LM agents. (1) Generality: LATS supports both reasoning and decision-
making tasks by defining a shared space of thoughts and actions. (2) Deliberate: The use of MCTS
and LM value function ensures a principled search that selects options with high value while explor-
6

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Prompt Method HotpotQA (EM)
I/O 0.32
CoT (Wei et al., 2022) 0.34
CoT - SC (Wang et al., 2022) 0.38
ToT (Yao et al., 2023a) 0.55
RAP (Hao et al., 2023) 0.60
RAP (n = 10) 0.60
LATS (CoT) 0.60
Prompt Method HotpotQA (EM)
ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b) 0.32
ReAct (best of k) 0.38
Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) 0.51
LATS 0.61
LATS (n = 1) 0.48
LATS (n = 3) 0.56
LATS (n = 10) 0.64
LATS (CoT + ReAct) 0.71
Table 2: GPT-3.5 reasoning-based prompting (left) and acting-based prompting (right) results on
HotpotQA. LATS achieves the highest exact match (EM) for acting and is competitive on reasoning.
Unless otherwise specified, we samplen = 5 nodes during expansion andk = 50 trajectories.
ing promising alternatives. (3) Adaptability: LATS is designed around the use of external feedback
through observations and self-reflection, enabling greater adaptation during problem-solving. (4)
Flexibility: LATS can accommodate different scenarios, environments, and resource stipulations by
modifying state design and tree dimensions. (5) Modularity: The base LM agent, reflection genera-
tor, and value function can be independently altered and adapted to individual LM properties.
5 E XPERIMENTS
To demonstrate the general applicability of LATS, we evaluate our method on a variety of decision-
making domains that requires both reasoning and acting ability: programming (Chen et al., 2021;
Austin et al., 2021), HotPotQA (Yang et al., 2018), and WebShop (Yao et al., 2022).
5.1 H OTPOTQA
For a task that can be approached with both reasoning-based and acting-based strategies, we consider
HotPotQA (Yang et al., 2018), a multi-hop question-answering benchmark that requires retrieval
over two or more Wikipedia passages. For the action space, in addition to LM thoughts we follow
the setup from Yao et al. (2023b), which provides the agent with API calls to search and lookup
information. The output of these API calls and self-generated reflections form the observation space.
We use a subset of 100 questions and three few-shot examples for each method. For ToT, we use
DFS as the base search algorithm and scoring with the LM as the heuristic. For all methods that
involve sampling, including LATS, we samplek = 50 trajectories. More details and prompts can be
found in Sec. D and Sec. E in the Appendix.
We evaluate internal reasoning strategies by removing actions and observations from the context,
corresponding to CoT (Wei et al., 2022) and its variants, CoT-SC (Wang et al., 2022), ToT (Yao
et al., 2023a), and RAP (Hao et al., 2023). These methods rely solely on the agent’s existing knowl-
edge to answer the question. We also consider acting-based methods ReAct, Reflexion, and LATS,
which augment the agent with the interactive API environment and primarily evaluate its informa-
tion retrieval abilities. While LATS is designed for scenarios where external feedback can enhance
reasoning, we also implement a reasoning-only version with CoT as the base prompt. We also com-
bine internal and external reasoning in LATS by first prompting with a CoT-based prompt, then
switching to a ReAct-based prompt upon failure. This is closer to how humans might approach this
task, by using tools to lookup additional information only when the answer is not already known.
Results. We observe in Tab. 2 that both internal reasoning and external retrieval strategies perform
well on HotPotQA. Due to their large-scale training corpus, modern LLMs already encode factual
knowledge and can often directly answer the question correctly. While CoT can slightly enhance
performance on questions requiring reasoning, larger gains are observed with search methods ToT
and RAP, which can sample and explore more outputs. We observe similar results for acting-based
methods. LATS surpasses ReAct, even when sampling the same number of trajectories, by expand-
ing more nodes with principled search (see Fig. 5 in Appendix D for a qualitative sample). This is
demonstrated when modifyingn, the number of nodes expanded during each iteration. Increasingn
7

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Prompt Method Model Pass@1
CoT (Wei et al., 2022) GPT-3.5 46.9
ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b) GPT-3.5 56.9
Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) GPT-3.5 68.1
ToT (Yao et al., 2023a) GPT-3.5 54.4
RAP (Hao et al., 2023) GPT-3.5 63.1
LATS (Ours) GPT-3.5 86.9
I/O GPT-4 80.1
Reflexion GPT-4 91.0
LATS GPT-4 94.4
Prompt Method Pass@1
CoT (Wei et al., 2022) 54.9
ReAct (Wei et al., 2022) 67.0
Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) 70.0
ToT (Yao et al., 2023a) 65.8
RAP (Hao et al., 2023) 71.4
LATS (Ours) 81.1
Table 3: GPT-3.5 and GPT-4 Pass@1 accuracy on HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021) and MBPP (Austin
et al., 2021). Prompting with LATS achieves the highest performance. We sample 5 solutions during
expansion for 8 iterations.
can consistently improve performance, although at greater computational and inference costs. LATS
is also competitive to RAP on internal reasoning but performs worse than acting. Combining inter-
nal and external reasoning in LATS results in the highest performance, indicating the importance of
external feedback in augmenting reasoning even in tasks the base LM can already perform.
5.2 P ROGRAMMING
To demonstrate the importance of external observations for complex reasoning tasks, we evaluate
the baselines and LATS on programming with Humaneval (Chen et al., 2021) and MBPP (Austin
et al., 2021). Both datasets measure the correctness of synthesized programs in Python from natural
language docstrings. We use individual solutions as the action space and test suite and compiler
feedback as the external observation. We follow Chen et al. (2022a) and use an LLM to generate
a synthetic test suite of syntactically valid “assert” statements for each question. For each step,
the solution is evaluated on this test suite, and the results including successful and failed tests and
compiler output, are added to the context as an observation. We use the same test suite for Reflexion.
For this task, the reasoning and acting baselines share an action space, but acting methods are able
to incorporate observations as additional context. For LATS, since each action corresponds to a
complete solution, we skip the simulation step of LATS and directly use the percentage of passed
tests as the backpropagated reward. We usek = 8 iterations, set the number of generated tests at 4,
and samplen = 5 solutions during expansion. After the search is completed, we select the solution
with the highest value and evaluate it on the real test suite for the pass@1 accuracy evaluation. More
details and prompts can be found in Sec. D and Sec. F in the Appendix.
Results. We find in Tab 3 that both search and semantic feedback are crucial for better performance.
Despite not using observations, ToT and RAP are competitive with Reflexion. LATS has the highest
performance on both datasets. Since RAP uses a similar search algorithm as LATS, this reveals the
importance of external feedback for difficult reasoning tasks such as programming. With GPT-4,
using LATS sets the state of the art for HumanEval, showing LATS can be used with more advanced
LLMs for higher performance.
5.3 W EBSHOP
For a complex decision-making environment with practical applications, we consider WebShop (Yao
et al., 2022), an online shopping environment composed of a website with 1.18M real-world products
and 12k human instructions. Agents must navigate a website through a variety of commands to
purchase an item matching a user specification. We use the preconstructed action space of search
and click commands and browser feedback and reflections for the observation. The performance is
gauged using two metrics: an average score, reflecting the percentage of user-specified attributes met
by the selected product, and a success rate, indicating the frequency with which the chosen product
fulfills all given conditions. We compare against acting-based prompting methods and RL-based
approaches. We evaluate on 50 instructions, expand n = 5 children for LATS, and set k = 30 for
LATS, ReAct best ofk, and Reflexion. More details and prompts are in Appendix D and G.
8

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Method Score SR
ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b) 53.8 28.0
ReAct (best of k) 59.1 32.0
Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) 64.2 35.0
LATS 75.9 38.0
IL Yao et al. (2022) 59.9 29.1
IL+RL Yao et al. (2022) 62.4 28.7
Fine-tuning (Furuta et al., 2023) 67.5 45.0
Expert 82.1 59.6
Table 4: Score and success rate (SR) on Web-
shop, separated into prompting, training, and
human performance. For the same number of
iterations, LATS improves both score and suc-
cess rate and surpasses RL-based training.
Prompt Method HotPotQA
ReAct (bestk = 250) 0.42
CoT-SC (k = 250) 0.40
ToT (ReAct) 0.49
RAP (ReAct) 0.54
LATS (DFS) 0.53
LATS (No Reflection) 0.56
LATS 0.61
Table 5: Standardized comparisons between
LATS, ToT, and RAP; we use ReAct as the base
prompt for all methods and sample n = 5 chil-
dren for MCTS and DFS andk = 50 maximum
trajectories.
Results. We find in Tab. 4 that GPT-3.5 with ReAct is competitive to imitation learning, and can
exceed reinforcement learning techniques with stronger prompting strategies. Sampling k = 30
trajectories with ReAct and Reflexion results in a similar performance, suggesting the semantic
feedback is not as helpful in complex environments like WebShop. Indeed like in Shinn et al. (2023),
we find that generated reflections are often generic and do not provide useful feedback, resulting in
a tendency for the agent to become stuck in local minima. However, using LATS indeed results in a
noticeable improvement, indicating a more effective exploration for the same number of iterations.
5.4 A DDITIONAL OBSERVATIONS
We also conduct additional experiments on HotPotQA to demonstrate the effect of each component
of LATS. We also design a version of ToT and RAP with ReAct prompt and can handle external
observations. We use HotPotQA as our setup incorporates both reasoning (through thoughts) and
acting (through API calls); the results are shown in Tab. 5. More ablations for token consumption
on HotPotQA are in Tab. 7 in Appendix C. Note that baselines generally perform worse than the
reasoning-only setting of HotPotQA, which indicates that the acting-based setting is more challeng-
ing and adaption of search algorithms to decision-making scenarios is non-trivial.
Self-reflection. We use self-reflection to provide additional semantic signals for the agent. We
observe a 0.05 performance drop when removed from LATS, suggesting this is useful. This is a
smaller gain Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) observes over ReAct (Yao et al., 2023b) as shown in
Tab. 2, suggesting overlap between the types of questions where there is an improvement with self-
reflection and search. This variant outperforms RAP-ReAct, reflecting our improvements to MCTS.
Search Algorithm. MCTS is a more principled search algorithm than variants like A* or DFS
search and the basis for observed performance gains. We observe the effects of using DFS, and
incorporate the LM-based heuristic used in ToT (Yao et al., 2023a) in which branches with low
values are pruned. This removes the selection and backpropagation operations, and we observe a
0.08 drop in performance when sampling the same number of nodes, but outperforms ToT-ReAct.
6 C ONCLUSION
In this work, we introduce Language Agent Tree Search (LATS), the first framework to unify plan-
ning, acting, and reasoning for enhanced LLM problem solving. By deliberately constructing tra-
jectories with search algorithms, incorporating external feedback, and enabling agents to learn from
experience, LATS addresses key limitations of prior prompting techniques. Our evaluations demon-
strate the ability of LATS to harness LLM capabilities for a variety of decision-making tasks while
keeping its reasoning ability without additional training. The proposed synergies between search,
interaction, and reflection offer a versatile approach to autonomous decision-making, highlighting
the potential of LLMs as generalist agents. A full discussion of the limitations and broader impacts
is in Appendix B.
9

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
