record_id: openreview:i43XCU54Br
source_used: openreview_pdf
fetched_url: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=i43XCU54Br
fetched_title: DYNAMIC LLM-A GENT NETWORK : AN LLM- AGENT COLLABORATION FRAMEWORK WITH AGENT TEAM OPTIMIZATION
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:08:37Z

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
DYNAMIC LLM-A GENT NETWORK :
AN LLM- AGENT COLLABORATION FRAMEWORK
WITH AGENT TEAM OPTIMIZATION
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
ABSTRACT
Large language model (LLM) agents have been shown effective on a wide range
of tasks, and by ensembling multiple LLM agents, their performances could be
further improved. Existing approaches employ a fixed set of agents to interact
with each other in a static architecture, which limits their generalizability to vari-
ous tasks and requires strong human prior in designing these agents. In this work,
we propose to construct a strategic team of agents communicating in a dynamic
interaction architecture based on the task query. Specifically, we build a frame-
work named Dynamic LLM-Agent Network (DyLAN) for LLM-agent collabora-
tion on complicated tasks like reasoning and code generation. DyLAN enables
agents to interact for multiple rounds in a dynamic architecture with inference-
time agent selection and an early-stopping mechanism to improve performance
and efficiency. We further design an automatic agent team optimization algorithm
based on an unsupervised metric termed Agent Importance Score , enabling the
selection of best agents based on the contribution each agent makes. Empirically,
we demonstrate that DyLAN performs well in both reasoning and code generation
tasks with reasonable computational cost. DyLAN achieves 13.0% and 13.3% im-
provement on MATH and HumanEval, respectively, compared to a single execu-
tion on GPT-35-turbo. On specific subjects of MMLU, agent team optimization
in DyLAN increases accuracy by up to 25.0%. 1
1 I NTRODUCTION
Large language model (LLM) agents (Richards & et al., 2023; Nakajima, 2023; Reworkd, 2023)
have achieved promising performance on a wide range of tasks, ranging from reasoning (Yao et al.,
2023) to code generation (Shinn et al., 2023), and even to embodied tasks such as video gaming
(Wang et al., 2023) and autopilot (Jin et al., 2023). Recent works tackle complicated tasks by
combining different LLM agents in a team to collaborate on the same query (Li et al., 2023; Du
et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b; Jiang et al., 2023; Shinn et al., 2023; Zheng et al., 2023; Wu et al.,
2023). In these works, such LLM-agent team is often set up statically with predefined roles for each
agent, such as introducing programmer and tester to communicate sequentially in a fixed order to
improve code generation (Dong et al., 2023).
In the case of collaborative work between different LLM agents on a specific task, a static setup
with predefined roles can, however, have several problems: (1) Manual setups require us to design
task-specific roles for LLM agents in each specific domain (Dong et al., 2023), making it difficult
to generalize to other domains or distinct tasks. (2) Additionally, under a static setup, LLM agents
interact to produce answers in a fixed order (Shinn et al., 2023) or in one single round (Jiang et al.,
2023), which might result in sensitivity to the domain and complexity of tasks. (3) Predefined roles
require strong human priors to design, and may not well align with the actual situations. In addition,
there is no systematic way to ensure that the LLM-agent collaboration systems have a sufficient
number of LLM agents and, most importantly, an optimized team of agents.
1We will release the code once the paper is accepted.
1

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Figure 1: Overview of DyLAN. The top part shows how DyLAN outputs the answer in a
feed-forward manner (Section 3). Inference-time agent selection is implemented with an LLM-
empowered ranker (bottom-left), during which the low-performing agent is deactivated in subse-
quent time steps. In agent team optimization (Section 3.3), first the contribution of each agent is
automatically evaluated using Agent Importance Score, denoted as I. Then the top-ranked agents
based on I will be selected as the optimized team of agents (bottom-right).
The landscape of LLM-agent collaborations requires a systematic framework in order to improve
generalizability, efficiency, and performance. Therefore, several properties should be exhibited: (1)
Task Agnostic: Prior works have suffered from the difficulty of generalizing across various domains
due to the dependence on task-specific tools. A task-agnostic system can facilitate the fast adapta-
tion of existing approaches to new situations. (2) Efficient: Instead of assigning agents in a static
pattern, dynamically removing agents with uninformative responses can prevent the creation of use-
less information as well as ensure accuracy in the process of reaching consensus. (3) Agent Team
Optimization: With thousands of open-source and unlimited LLM-generated prompts that serve a
variety of roles, it is difficult to identify what the optimal team of agents might be. Ideally, multi-
agent systems should be able to adapt their composition in response to the particular domain of a
query with minimal supervision. While a few efforts have been made (Chen et al., 2023b; Ruan
et al., 2023; Zhang et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2023b; Lu et al., 2023; Aggarwal et al., 2023; Liu et al.,
2023b; Besta et al., 2023), a framework that integrates all of these aspects is still lacking.
To fill these gaps, in this work, we introduce a framework named Dynamic LLM-Agent Network
(DyLAN) in Section 3. Concretely, we employ a feed-forward network to formulate the process of
LLM-agent collaboration for arbitrary tasks. As a result, we view LLM agents at specific time steps
as nodes in a network and the messages they exchange at different time steps as edges. In this way,
we can organize multi-round LLM-agent collaboration into a multilayered network. To enhance
the efficiency and the performance of LLM-agent collaboration on various tasks, we use an LLM-
empowered ranker (Qin et al., 2023) to rank different LLM agents and deactivate low-performing
agents in the subsequent interaction (i.e., inference-time agent selection), thereby creating a dy-
namic architecture of interactions. Additionally, we introduce an early-stopping mechanism via a
Byzantine Consensus to ensure efficiency, by terminating the inference process when agents within
the same layer reach consensus. Moreover, we propose automatic agent team optimization with-
out strong human priors to increase the efficiency and effectiveness of agent team initialization.
Specifically, to select the top-k agents, we introduce a three-step procedure where we first ask each
agent to rate its predecessors on their solutions ( propagation), and then for each agent, aggregate
2

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
the ratings from their successors to quantify its contribution ( aggregation). Finally, after summing
up the ratings across all time steps, we derive an Agent Importance Score for each agent. Then,
we can select the top-performing agents based on their importance scores to obtain the optimized
team of agents (selection). In this way, DyLAN achieves the task-agnostic property by formulating
LLM-agent collaboration into a feed-forward network to decouple the interaction architecture and
task-specific design, exhibits efficiency through inference-time agent selection and early-stopping
mechanism, and enables agent team optimization through a selection algorithm based on agent im-
portance scores. We evaluate DyLAN on multiple representative tasks such as general reasoning,
arithmetic reasoning, and code generation, and find that DyLAN demonstrates higher accuracy and
efficiency over baselines. We also show that Agent Importance Score can be used as a solid un-
supervised indicator for optimizing the composition of agents for DyLAN. On specific subjects of
MMLU, agent team optimization in DyLAN increases accuracy by up to 25.0%.
To sum up, our contributions are as follows:
• We propose a generic LLM-agent collaboration framework DyLAN that organizes agents
into a multi-layered feed-forward network with dynamic architecture by introducing
inference-time agent selection and early-stopping mechanism.
• We develop an automatic agent team optimization algorithm for DyLAN based on an un-
supervised Agent Importance Score, in order to achieve both efficiency and effectiveness.
• Empirically, DyLAN demonstrates high accuracy, efficiency, and stability in general rea-
soning, arithmetic reasoning, and code generation tasks.
2 R ELATED WORK
Interaction Architecture in LLM-agent Collaboration Collaboration between multiple LLM
agents has demonstrated strong performance on a variety of tasks in recent years and has emerged
as a promising approach to enhance the capabilities of individual LLMs. To enable collaborations
between multiple agents, recent studies have developed different interaction architectures and as-
signed agents in static patterns. For instance, Du et al. (2023); Liang et al. (2023); Xiong et al.
(2023) take multiple LLM instances into a debate for a fixed number of rounds, thus boosting their
factuality and reasoning capacities. Instead of calling LLMs iteratively, Ning et al. (2023) distribute
LLMs in parallel and concatenates their answers to produce better results. To aggregate multiple
LLM responses, Jiang et al. (2023) generate candidates by different LLMs in one round and uses
pairwise ranking to combine the top responses into one final response. It is worth noting that Hao
et al. (2023) organizes LLM instances into linear layers and adopts supervised learning in context
space, not the scenario in which we are interested. However, running LLMs in a static architecture
may limit their performance and generalization. Although Zhang et al. (2023) adopt a dynamic di-
rected acyclic graph structure during inference, they merely focus on reasoning and are incompatible
with external tools and diverse agents with different roles. In this work, we propose an interaction
architecture that can be adjusted dynamically based on the query and be compatible with feedback
and tool augmentation.
Evaluation of the Contribution of LLM Agents It is non-trivial to evaluate the contribution of
each LLM agent in a multi-agent system, especially when they communicate over multiple rounds.
In the single-round setting, given multiple candidates to select the best one, existing methods use
LLMs heavily for evaluation. However, Xiong et al. (2023) show that LLMs tend to be overconfi-
dent. For more reliable results, pairwise ranking based on an additional LLM-powered ranker has
been introduced in Jiang et al. (2023) for greater accuracy. To rankn responses with an independent
LLM in a single round, they compare all O(n2) pairs. For better efficiency, Qin et al. (2023) use a
k-length sliding window to choose top k responses within O(nk) pairwise comparisons. However,
these methods have not been extended to multi-round settings. Inspired by the neuron importance
score (Yu et al., 2018), we evaluate agents by propagating and aggregating single-round peer ratings.
In this way, we then introduce an unsupervised metric called Agent Importance Score to quantify
the contribution of each agent in multi-round collaborations (Section 3.3).
Team Optimization for LLM Agents In terms of designing and selecting agents, Ruan et al.
(2023) decompose tasks to choose or create tools accordingly. Using LLM as a planner, Lu et al.
3

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Table 1: Comparison between DyLAN and representative previous works. In the second row, nodes
denote agents at different time steps (A), arrows represent edges (E), and color indicates the role of
an agent. Among these works, DyLAN is the only one which demonstrates all four key dimensions
of LLM-agent collaboration, i.e., compatible with multiple roles, having an early-stopping mecha-
nism, supporting dynamic interactions, and performing agent team optimization.
Method Single LLM-Blender PHP Reflexion LLM Debate DyLAN
Interaction Architecture
(A, E)
Multiple Roles × × × ! × !
Early Stopping × × × ! × !
Dynamic Interactions × ! × × × !
Agent Team Optimization × × × × × !
(2023) sequentially select agents and tools according to their descriptions. Wang et al. (2023b) use
LLMs to generate prompts for agents in response to a task query. During inference, Chen et al.
(2023b) select a fixed number of agents from a set of manual prompt candidates via an additional
LLM during each round of discussion. However, manual prompts require careful design, and prede-
fined or generated descriptions may not result in the desired abilities of the agents during inference.
Therefore, selecting an appropriate team of agents based on their response to a query is necessary
and more appropriate. While team optimization for LLM agents is a relatively new area, human-
team optimization has been studied for a long time. For instance, Liu et al. (2015) show that skill
contribution is essential for selecting crowd workers to solve outsourced tasks efficiently. Based
on peer rating, Lykourentzou et al. (2022) develop an algorithm for managing online workers in
an optimal organization. Building upon these prior works, we introduce an automatic algorithm to
optimize the team of agents by quantifying agents’ contributions based on their peer ratings.
3 D YNAMIC LLM-A GENT NETWORK (DYLAN)
We introduce an LLM-agent collaboration framework named Dynamic LLM-Agent Network
(DyLAN) to allow dynamic interaction between agents in LLM-agent collaborations, as illustrated
in Figure 1. We formulate the systems in feed-forward networks to represent interaction architecture
(Section 3.1). Under the formulation, we elaborate DyLAN’s dynamic architecture designs in Sec-
tion 3.2. Finally, we introduce agent team optimization, based on our unsupervised metric Agent
Importance Score on top of DyLAN (Section 3.3).
3.1 F ORMULATION
In LLM-agent collaborations, agents exchange textual messages in multi-round interactions. By
viewing LLM agents at different time steps as nodes, we can treat the message exchange between
multiple nodes as edges in a feed-forward network. Agents may send their reasoning steps to each
other for reasoning, or send code completions for code generation, as illustrated in Appendix D.6.
We then demonstrate how both the inference process and agent team optimization can be viewed
as message passing algorithms over this abstract network, as an essential task-agnostic basis for
DyLAN. The collaboration problem is defined to solve query q by output o from a given system S.
According to the formulation, an LLM-agent collaboration comprises three components:
Node The node denotes an agent at a specific time step. The agent takes the contexts from other
agents at the previous time step as input and generates responses based on the input query. An agent
can be (I) an LLM agent that could be augmented with tools, (II) an independent tool like a script or a
dedicated model, or (III) a cluster of tools. Based on the definition, we focus on textual information
exchange between agents. Formally, the i-th agent at the t-th time step can be represented as a
function at,i mapping the agent’s prompt pi (empty for (II) and (III) agents), the input query q, and
responses from predecessor agents Rt−1 to the response of itself: rt,i = at,i(pi, q, Rt−1), where
4

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Rt−1 ={rt−1,j|j = 1 , 2, ...}. Let A be the set of all nodes, n be the total amount of agents, and T
be the maximum time step.
Edge Edges refer to the communication channels between nodes in A during the multi-agent col-
laboration. Let E represents the set of all edges in the system. The edge is directional and could
be formally represented as e = (at−1,i, at,j)∈ E, where at−1,i, at,j represents adjacent agents that
could pass textual information: at,j could perceive at−1,i’s output as its context. Thus, nodes are
linked by edges to form the interaction architecture of agent collaboration systems, in shape of a
feed-forward network S = (A, E).
Message Passing Message passing algorithms can guide information flow through the nodes and
edges in the feed-forward network. In our LLM-agent based feed-forward network formulation,
we envision two types of message passing. In a forward passing fashion, by passing messages
to specific agents across different time steps, LLM-agent collaboration systems generate the final
answer in response to the task query. Formally, we denote the output as o, which is the result of
the query q processed by system S and an algorithm fInfer denoting the inference process explicitly
(Algorithm 1 for DyLAN): o = fInfer(S, q). In a backward passing manner, The calculation process
of Agent Importance ScoreI is calculated by an algorithmfImp to pass scores backward along edges
(Algorithm 2 for DyLAN): I = fImp(S, q).
The formulation decouples the interaction architecture and the algorithm of inference process. Using
this formulation, we can categorize prior works based on their interaction architectures in Table 1.
3.2 C ONSTRUCTION OF DYLAN
With the aforementioned formulation, we step further to stack multiple layers along the temporal
axis (e.g., different rounds of interaction) to build Dynamic LLM-Agent Network (DyLAN). To im-
prove the efficiency and the performance of LLM-agent collaboration on various tasks, we propose
to (1) add inference-time agent selection at a middle time step and (2) use Byzantine Consensus to
terminate inference at a proper layer.
We define a layer as a set of agents functioning at the same time step along the temporal axis.
In each layer, each node receives responses from all other nodes in the previous layer, i.e., the
previous time step. Such communications form edges between layers, as shown in Figure 1. The
query is fed into nodes in the first layer. Therefore, when LLM agents diverge on a query, they
receive others’ responses and have a debate by commenting on each other’s solutions, thus deepening
the reasoning procedure and reaching better consistency at a certain time step with the vantage of
multiple expertise. Agents assigned diverse roles might respond from their specific perspectives.
To focus on the best solutions and reduce the computational cost, we set up theinference-time agent
selection at L-th layer by selecting the top-m responses to feed forward. We use an additional LLM
agent, as the “LLM Ranker” in Figure 1, to analyze responses from the former layer and identify
the best ones, following Jiang et al. (2023). Agents identified as not being useful are deactivated in
subsequent layers, so as are the edges connecting them.
To further enhance efficiency, we introduce anearly-stopping mechanism. Inspired by the Byzan-
tine Consensus theory (Castro & Liskov, 1999), at least 3p + 1 agents are needed to tolerate p
faulty agents in a single round of communication. Following the theory, the inference process will
be terminated when over 2/3 of agents in a single layer have a consistent answer. In practice, the
inference process will also be terminated when the maximum time step is reached. Note that none
of the consistency measures used in prior work (Wang et al., 2023a; Aggarwal et al., 2023) applies
to multi-round multi-agent interaction since their theories are assumed to execute a single LLM in-
stance multiple times. In our case, we apply the early-stopping mechanism to each layer of DyLAN.
In short, DyLAN gives the answer in a forward passing manner with an efficient dynamic architec-
ture for agent collaborations (Algorithm 1). Other implementation details are in Appendix C.1.
3.3 A GENT TEAM OPTIMIZATION
To automatically find the optimal team of agents among candidates for specific domains and based
on their actual responses, we set up an algorithm in which the agent team optimization process
could be formulated as a function fOptim : S→ S′, where S′ = ( A′, E′) and A′ denotes a smaller
5

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Table 2: Accuracy (%) on MATH dataset. CoT refers to Chain-of-Thought prompting (Wei et al.,
2022) and examples are from original dataset. The number in parentheses indicates the perfor-
mance difference relative to a single execution. The median of three trials is reported when non-zero
temperature is used.
Method Prompting Algebra Counting and Geometry Intermediate Number Pre- Pre- Overall #API
Probability Algebra Theory Algebra Calculus Calls
Single Execution
CoT
43.6 29.3 21.5 15.8 30.0 48.9 16.5 31.6 (+0.0) 1.00
LLM-Blender 47.5 25.5 23.8 13.8 39.7 46.7 15.8 31.7 (+0.1) 6.00
LLM Debate 50.2 25.3 22.3 13.1 28.9 48.0 19.0 32.4 (+0.8) 8.00
DyLAN (Ours) 52.9 27.2 25.3 15.5 33.5 55.2 19.0 35.7 (+4.1) 7.15
Single Execution Complex
CoT
49.1 29.7 22.3 14.6 33.4 53.8 16.8 34.1 (+0.0) 1.00
PHP 51.1 33.7 25.4 17.1 35.1 57.7 16.1 36.5 (+2.4) 3.67
DyLAN (Ours) 53.7 33.3 26.1 18.1 33.5 58.7 18.9 37.6 (+3.5) 6.21
Table 3: Accuracy (%) on MMLU dataset. “Other” stands for subjects like business, health, and
misc in MMLU. The median of three trials is reported when non-zero temperature is used.
Method Humanities Social STEM Other Overall #API
Science Calls
Random 25.0 25.0 25.0 25.0 25.0 -
Single Execution 59.8 74.0 62.9 71.8 66.4 (+0.0) 1.00
LLM-Blender 60.4 75.2 66.3 70.7 67.3 (+0.9) 6.00
LLM Debate 59.8 77.4 69.0 75.5 69.3 (+2.9) 12.00
DyLAN (Ours) 62.1 79.1 69.7 75.5 70.5 (+4.1) 4.39
but optimized composition of agents with better performance. With a pool of agent candidates, we
implement fOptim in a three-step procedure, as shown in Figure 1: (1) Propagation: Take all candi-
dates into a collaboration, ask each node to rate the solutions to the task query from its predecessors
(in the forward pass); (2)Aggregation: Each node aggregates the ratings it has received from its suc-
cessors towards itself (via another backward pass) to quantify its own contribution independently at
different time steps. (3) Selection: During the last step, we sum up the scores for the same agent
over all time steps to derive an importance score for each agent, and extract the top-k agents that are
most contributory according to these scores as the optimized composition.
Specifically, at the step of Propagation, for each agent, we ask it to rate the responses from all
its predecessors. Formally, the i-th agent at the t-th time step takes its prompt pi, the input query
q, and all previous responses Rt−1 from their predecessors, and further map them via a scoring
function f (s)
t,i (·,·,·) to produce the rating scores. Here, we use wt−1,j,i to refer to the rating score
on at−1,j from at,i, and [wt−1,1,i, wt−1,2,i, ..., wt−1,n,i] = f (s)
t,i (pi, q, Rt−1). After propagation, the
contribution of node at,i is the sum of its successors’ contribution multiplied by their peers’ ratings
on the agent’s response. Formally, the aggregation process is described as:
It−1,j =
X
(at−1,j ,at,i)∈E
It,i· wt−1,j,i, (1)
where It,i denotes the contribution of at,i. In the final Selection step, Agent Importance Score Ii for
the i-th agent is defined as Ii = PT
t=1 It,i. In practice, we initialize the contributions in the final
layer first, and step backward to perform Aggregation layer by layer (Algorithm 2). The definition
guarantees that the agent importance scores add up to 1 in each layer, which benefits fair comparison.
Other details, such as initializing contributions in the final layer, are presented in Appendix C.2.
4 E XPERIMENTS
4.1 S ETUP
To verify the effectiveness and efficiency of DyLAN, we conduct extensive experiments on three
representative tasks including arithmetic reasoning, general reasoning, and code generation.
6

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Arithmetic Reasoning (AR) We leverage MATH (Hendrycks et al., 2021b) as the evaluation
dataset, which consists of 7 subareas and contains 5,000 questions in the test set. We choose LLM
Debate (Du et al., 2023), LLM-Blender (Jiang et al., 2023), and the single execution on LLM as
baselines. We also compared DyLAN to the previous state-of-the-art method PHP (Zheng et al.,
2023). To draw a fair comparison, we categorize systems by prompting strategies, including nor-
mal CoT prompts (Wei et al., 2022) provided in the original dataset and Complex CoT provided
by PHP. Since the task is sensitive to hyper-parameters, we have tuned and used each system’s best
temperature. Preliminary experiments show that collaborating agents of different roles did not
introduce significant improvement, therefore we adopt agents of the same role for all systems.
Table 4: Demonstration of
experiment settings. We
elaborate on the number of
agents before and after op-
timization and tool usage in
DyLAN of each task.
Task Agent Tool
Team Size Usage
AR 4 ×
GR 7→ 4 ×
CG 12→ 8 !
General Reasoning (GR) For the general reasoning task, we use the
MMLU dataset (Hendrycks et al., 2021a), which contains four as-
pects of a vast amount of problems in 57 subjects. We down-sample
1/5 of the problems in the test set because of its huge quantity. We use
the same baselines as arithmetic reasoning. To align with previous
works and prevent degeneration of LLM Debate, we set the hyper-
parameter temperature to 1 for all systems. The team of agents
is optimized for each subject based onAgent Importance Score when
evaluating DyLAN, as demonstrated in Table 4. The roles of can-
didates match the categories of MMLU, including “Mathematician”
and “Programmer” for STEM, “Lawyer” and “Historian” for Human-
ities, “Economist” and “Psychologist” in Social Science, and “Doc-
tor” for clinical questions in the “Other” category.
Code Generation (CG) We use the HumanEval benchmark in the code generation task, with 164
human-labeled function-level completion codes and unit tests (Chen et al., 2021). We found that
LLM Debate and LLM-Blender could not feasibly adapt to this task in their implementation, thus
they are excluded them from the baselines. As a result, we leverage two strong methods CodeT
(Chen et al., 2023a) and Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) along with the single execution as the base-
lines. The team of agents is optimized in DyLAN according to Table 4. Additionally, we require 4
of the 8 agents should be the role of code writer and the other 4 are judges providing code reviews in
different time steps. And two of the judges are individually augmented with a code interpreter and a
syntax checker. Please refer to Appendix C.1 for more details.
4.2 M AIN RESULTS
Table 5: Experimental results on HumanEval
dataset. We indicate the foundation model of
methods except for GPT-35-turbo. The me-
dian of three trials is reported when non-zero
temperature is used.
Method Pass@1 #API
Calls
Single Execution 73.2 (+0.0) 1.00
CodeT 65.8 (-7.4) 20.00
CodeT (Codex) 74.8 (+1.6) 20.00
Reflexion 68.3 (-4.9) 4.05
DyLAN (Ours) 82.9 (+9.7) 16.85
Single Execution (GPT-4) 88.4 (+15.2) 1.00
Reflexion (GPT-4) 91.4 (+18.2) 7.32
DyLAN (Ours, GPT-4) 92.1 (+18.9) 15.94
In Table 2, Table 3, and Table 5, we report the
classification accuracy on MATH and MMLU, and
Pass@1 on HumanEval, respectively. Addition-
ally, we recorded the average times of calling
LLMs of each method on each query as #API calls.
This metric serves as a proxy for the computational
cost and the efficiency of architectures for LLM-
agent collaborations, which cannot be determined
from the number of tokens since the number varies
greatly depending on the query.
DyLAN improves overall performance in differ-
ent tasks. Table 2 shows that DyLAN has signifi-
cantly higher performance than baselines on arith-
metic reasoning, demonstrating the advantage of
the dynamic architecture. Relative to a single ex-
ecution, it gains a +4.1 improvement with CoT
prompts and +3.5 with Complex CoT prompts,
demonstrating robustness against different prompt-
ing strategies. In Table 3 and Table 5, DyLAN also significantly improves the performance by +4.1
and +9.7 on general reasoning and code generation tasks, respectively, relative to the single execu-
tion. We argue part of the improvement can be attributed to the dynamic multi-path architecture,
which allows different opinions to be delivered simultaneously. In contrast, for methods in sequen-
tial architecture like PHP (Zheng et al., 2023), incorrect intermediate answers might easily influence
7

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
the final output due to only one reasoning path. It is the same for Reflexion (Shinn et al., 2023) in
code generation, in which false tests may mislead the self-debugging process from our observations.
In our case, any feedback from predecessors could be rated by the nodes at any time step, making it
easier to identify false intermediate feedback explicitly.
DyLAN has a reasonable computational cost. From Table 2, we find DyLAN realizes an 10.2%
improvement to LLM Debate in terms of accuracy, with 10.6% lower #API calls (L3 vs. L4), sug-
gesting it is a better trade-off between efficiency and effectiveness. Similar trends can be observed
in Table 3. DyLAN has a better overall accuracy with only 36.6% API calls of LLM Debate (4.39
vs. 12.00). Moreover, we see that DyLAN dynamically adjusts the cost based on the difficulty of a
query. Given that questions in MMLU are less challenging than in MATH, DyLAN has 2.76 fewer
#API calls on the query from MMLU compared to one from MATH. This makes sense as generally,
the more complex the task, the harder it will be to come to a consensus.
Table 6: The optimized composition of roles and per-
formance improvement in different subjects of MMLU
dataset when optimizing DyLAN of 7 agents to 4 agents.
Subject Optimized Composition Performance Improvement
college Economist, Lawyer, 25.0 : 40.0→ 65.0mathematics Programmer, Mathematician
management Lawyer, Psychologist, 14.3 : 76.2→ 90.5Economist, Programmer
high school Historian, Programmer, 9.3 : 65.1→ 74.4statistics Psychologist, Mathematician
clinical Doctor, Mathematician, 5.7 : 69.8→ 75.5knowledge Programmer, Psychologist
public Historian, Psychologist, 4.5 : 54.5→ 59.1relations Lawyer, Mathematician
DyLAN benefits from agent team op-
timization. Additionally, we found that
an optimized team of agents could en-
hance DyLAN. For different subjects
in MMLU, agent compositions are ad-
justed correspondingly to improve up
to 25.0% in accuracy, as shown in Ta-
ble 6. After agent team optimization, we
find a smaller set of agents are selected
from the given large pool of candidates
for specific subjects, resulting in signifi-
cant performance improvement, such as
“Mathematician”, “Programmer”, and
“Economist” for college mathematics,
and “Doctor” and “Psychologist” for
clinical knowledge. Moreover, before
performing agent team optimization, i.e., all the 12 agents are used, the performance of DyLAN
on HumanEval is 76.2, which means agent team optimization introduces an improvement of +6.7
points (76.2→ 82.9), suggesting that Agent Importance Scores can effectively capture and reflect
the actual abilities of agents to particular task domains.
4.3 A BLATION STUDIES
10 2
10 1
100
Proportion of Dataset
69.0
69.5
70.0
70.5
71.0Accuracy
69.9
70.3
70.5
Optimization
Random Selection
10 2
10 1
100
Proportion of Dataset
76
78
80
82
84Pass@1
79.3
82.3 82.9
Optimization
Random Selection
Figure 2: Experimental results of optimizing agent team with small subsets of MMLU (left) and Hu-
manEval (right). X-axis denotes the proportion to the original datasets. We also randomly selected
the same amount of agents as a baseline.
Data Efficiency of Agent Team Optimization We further demonstrate the data efficiency of agent
team optimization by performing it based on different amount of data. The experiments are con-
ducted on the MMLU and HumanEval datasets. We sample the subsets with the proportions of 0.01
and 0.1 of the original dataset. Agent team optimization is performed on the subsets and tested the
optimized team of agents on the whole dataset. The settings are identical to experiments in Sec-
tion 4.1. As shown in Figure 2, with the optimized team of agents on 0.1 of the original dataset,
DyLAN has demonstrated similar performance compared to optimizing on the whole dataset, with
8

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
12345678 Number of Agents
68.0
68.5
69.0
69.5
70.0
70.5
71.0Accuracy
68.4
69.9
70.5
69.5
DyLAN
LLM Debate (4 agents)
8 7 4 3 2 1Number of Agents
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
14#API Calls
2.83
3.904.39
8.30
LLM Debate (4 agents)
DyLAN
Figure 3: Impact of optimized agent team size. 2 ∼4 agents are selected from 7 candidate agents
based on Agent Importance Score. Accuracy (left) and #API calls (right) on MMLU are reported.
only 0.2 loss of overall accuracy on MMLU and 0.6 loss of Pass@1 on HumanEval. Especially,
as code review has significant impact on the performance on code generation, it is critical to se-
lect a proper set of judges to provide code review. We can observe that even with only 0.01 of the
original dataset, DyLAN could obtain a significant improvement of +3.7 over random selection on
HumanEval, indicating its effectiveness on selecting proper team of agents.
Impact of Optimized Agent Team Size As shown in Figure 3, DyLAN with an optimized team of
3 agents can outperform both the same architecture with 7 agents and LLM Debate with 4 agents,
suggesting the effectiveness of our proposed agent optimization. The efficiency is also significantly
improved by 52.9% and 67.8%, respectively. These results indicate that an optimized selection of
agents would be able to collaborate on tasks better and reach the consensus much faster and more
accurately than many agents thrown together at random.
Table 7: Ablation study on the
early-stopping mechanism (es) and the
inference-time agent selection compo-
nent ( its). #API denotes the average
number of API calls.
Method MATH MMLU HumanEval
Acc. #API Acc. #API Pass@1 #API
DyLAN 35.7 7.15 70.5 4.39 82.9 16.85
w/o es 35.0 13.00 70.1 13.00 80.5 19.00
w/o its 33.8 8.20 69.9 7.05 76.2 17.98
Impact of Early-Stopping and Inference-Time Agent
Selection As shown in Table 7, early-stopping mechanism
boosts efficiency to a great extent by minimizing #API
calls by 45.0%, 66.2%, and 11.3% on MATH, MMLU,
and HumanEval respectively, while providing slight per-
formance improvement. Inference-time agent selection,
however, is critical to enhance the correctness of the fi-
nal answer. We conjecture it is because low-performing
agents are filtered at specific time steps.
Stability of DyLAN with Different Backbone Models
There is also a notable difference in code generation tasks
when the backbone model changes (Table 5). Reflexion
and CodeT’s performances are heavily related to the backbone model (L4 vs. L5 and L6 vs. L9).
Instead, DyLAN shows a steady, consistent high performance (L7 vs. L10) under different backbone
models with almost the same amount of API calls.
5 C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This work introduces a framework named Dynamic LLM-Agent Network (DyLAN) for LLM-agent
collaboration on complicated tasks. DyLAN enables agents to interact for multiple rounds in a dy-
namic architecture with inference-time agent selection and an early-stopping mechanism to improve
performance and efficiency. We further design an automatic agent team optimization algorithm
based on an unsupervised metric termed Agent Importance Score , enabling the selection of best
agents based on the contribution each agent makes. Overall, DyLAN reveals significant improve-
ment on diverse tasks with relatively less computational cost compared to baselines.
In this work, the agents are driven by GPT-3.5-turbo and GPT-4, we will explore the effectiveness
of DyLAN on agents built on open-source foundation models in future. And it is also worth to
extend DyLAN to more complicate scenarios such as software development, virtual room chat,
video games, and so on (Hong et al., 2023; Nascimento et al., 2023; Zhou et al., 2023; Zhu et al.,
2023; Chan et al., 2023).
9

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
