record_id: openreview:bXLOOoR2ft
source_used: openreview_pdf
fetched_url: https://openreview.net/pdf?id=bXLOOoR2ft
fetched_title: DORAEMON GPT : T OWARD UNDERSTANDING DY- NAMIC SCENES WITH LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:08:36Z

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
DORAEMON GPT
: T OWARD UNDERSTANDING DY-
NAMIC SCENES WITH LARGE LANGUAGE MODELS
Anonymous authors
Paper under double-blind review
ABSTRACT
The field of AI agents is advancing at an unprecedented rate due to the capa-
bilities of large language models (LLMs). However, LLM-driven visual agents
mainly focus on solving tasks for the image modality, which limits their ability to
understand the dynamic nature of the real world, making it still far from real-life
applications, e.g., guiding students in laboratory experiments and identifying their
mistakes. Considering the video modality better reflects the ever-changing and
perceptually intensive nature of real-world scenarios, we devise DoraemonGPT,
a comprehensive and conceptually elegant system driven by LLMs to handle dy-
namic video tasks. Given a video with a question/task, DoraemonGPT begins
by converting the input video with massive content into a symbolic memory that
stores task-related attributes. This structured representation allows for spatial-
temporal querying and reasoning by sub-task tools, resulting in concise and rele-
vant intermediate results. Recognizing that LLMs have limited internal knowledge
when it comes to specialized domains ( e.g., analyzing the scientific principles
underlying experiments), we incorporate plug-and-play tools to assess external
knowledge and address tasks across different domains. Moreover, we introduce
a novel LLM-driven planner based on Monte Carlo Tree Search to efficiently ex-
plore the large planning space for scheduling various tools. The planner iteratively
finds feasible solutions by backpropagating the result’s reward, and multiple solu-
tions can be summarized into an improved final answer. We extensively evaluate
DoraemonGPT in dynamic scenes and provide in-the-wild showcases demonstrat-
ing its ability to handle more complex questions than previous studies.
1 I NTRODUCTION
Based on the advancements in large language models (LLMs) [1–8], recent LLM-driven agents [9–
11] have demonstrated promise in planning the decomposition of complex image tasks into manage-
able subtask sequences and solving them step-by-step. While static images have been extensively
studied, real-world environments are inherently dynamic [12] and ever-changing [13]. Commonly,
capturing real-life scenes is a data-intensive procedure, usually processed by streaming static im-
ages into dynamic videos. In turn, the spatial-temporal reasoning of videos is critical in real-life
recognition, semantic description, causal reasoning, etc.
Toward understanding dynamic scenes, developing an LLM-driven agent to handle dynamic videos
is of great significance yet involves several grand challenges: i) Spatial-temporal Reasoning. The
ability to reason about the relationships between instances and actions is crucial for intelligent action
planning and decision making. Such relationships may be relevant to space [14], time [15], or their
spatial-temporal combination. i) Larger Planning Space . Compared to static images, high-level
semantics about actions and their intentions can typically only be inferred from temporal visual
observations [16]. In other words, the inference of temporal semantics is necessary and will enlarge
the search space of planning dynamic video tasks by the agent. iii) Limited Internal Knowledge .
It’s clear that LLMs can not encode all the knowledge required for understanding every video due
to the ever-changing nature of the real world and/or the lack of training on proprietary datasets [17].
In light of the foregoing discussions, we present DoraemonGPT, an intuitive yet versatile system
driven by LLMs that is compatible with various foundation models and video applications. Dorae-
monGPT has three desirable abilities: First, collecting information regarding the given task before
1

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
reasoning. In DoraemonGPT, the decomposition of the given dynamic task is decided by the agent-
based reasoning of spatial-temporal relations, which are inferred from informative attributes, such
as instance locations, actions, scene changes, etc. However, it is important to note that only task-
solving related information is critical, as gathering excessive context tends to hinder the LLMs’
capability [18]. Second, exploring better solutions before making decisions. LLM-driven plan-
ning [19–23] decomposes high-level tasks into sub-tasks or action sequences. Considering an action
sequence as a root-to-leaf path in a tree containing all possible sequences, the planning can be
viewed as finding optimal decisions from a tree-like search space [24]. Regarding the large planning
space for solving tasks in dynamic scenes, prompting LLMs with tree-like search methods [25–27]
offers opportunities for better solutions and even the possibility of considering tasks from differ-
ent perspectives. Third, supporting knowledge extension. Just as humans consult reference books
to tackle domain-specific issues, DoraemonGPT is designed to select the most relevant knowledge
source from a series of given external knowledge sources (e.g., search engines, textbooks, databases,
etc.) and then query the information from it during the planning.
More specifically, DoraemonGPT is structured in a form of ⟨memory, tool, planner⟩ (Fig. 1c): i)
Task-related Symbolic Memory (§3.1). To collect information related to the given video and task,
we consider decoupling spatial-temporal attributes into two memories: space-dominant and time-
dominant. Before constructing these memories, LLMs are used to determine their relevance to the
given task and keep only the useful one(s). Foundation models are then employed to extract space-
dominant attributes (e.g., instance detection, trajectory, description, action, etc.) or time-dominant
attributes (e.g., frame captions, video descriptions, audio speech, etc.) and integrate them into a
compact table, which facilitates LLMs to query information by using symbolic language (e.g., SQL
language). ii) Sub-task (§3.1) and Knowledge (§3.2) Tools. To compact our planner’s context/text
length and improve effectiveness, we simplify memory information querying by designing a series
of sub-task tools. Each tool focuses on different kinds ofspatial-temporal reasoning (e.g., “How... ”,
“Why... ”, etc.) by using individual LLM-driven sub-agents with task-specific prompts and examples.
Additionally, for tasks requiring domain-specific knowledge, external knowledge sources can be
easily incorporated through dedicated sub-agent tools. iii) Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS)
Planner (§3.3). To efficiently explore the large planning space, we propose a novel tree-search-like
planner. The planner iteratively finds feasible solutions by backpropagating the answer’s reward and
selecting a highly expandable node to expand a new solution. After summarizing all the results,
the planner derives an informative final answer. To design the tree search planner, we equip our
DoraemonGPT with MCTS [27–29], which has shown effectiveness in finding optimal decisions
from a large search space [30], especially in the game AI community [31–33].
Combining the above designs together, DoraemonGPT handles dynamic spatial-temporal tasks ef-
fectively and targeted, supports a comprehensive exploration of multiple potential solutions, and
can extend its expertise by leveraging multi-source knowledge. On the NExT-QA [34] bench-
mark, which includes a variety of dynamic scenarios and challenging video reasoning tasks, our
DoraemonGPT outperforms recent LLM-driven competitors ( e.g., surpassing ViperGPT [9] by
19.3%/5.6%/15.2% in causal/temporal/descriptive reasoning). Extensive ablation studies validate
our MCTS planner’s effectiveness, outperforming the na¨ıve DFS method and other baselines. More-
over, when dealing with more complex in-the-wild tasks previously unapplicable or neglected by re-
cent approaches [9, 35], DoraemonGPT provides reasonable answers by integrating external know-
ledge and summarizing results from multiple feasible solutions.
2 R ELATED WORK
Multimodal Understanding. Before the emergence of LLMs, various efforts were made to create
multimodal systems tailored for specific tasks [38–50]. While these systems showed impressive per-
formance in their respective domains, their applicability to broader, real-world scenarios was limited
due to the lack of generalizability. Recent years have witnessed remarkable progress ingeneral mul-
timodal systems, due to the fast evolution of data volumes and computational resources. Specifically,
Frozen [51] is a milestone; it demenstrates a feasible way to empower LLMs the ability to handle
visual inputs. Since it was proposed, numerous efforts have been devoted to build large multimodal
models [7, 52–54]. Considering the training cost, several attempts [55, 56] try to build zero-shot sys-
tems for various tasks. An alternative strategy [57], which will be detailed latter, involves combining
multiple models or APIs to tackle compositional multimodal reasoning tasks. Our DoraemonGPT
2

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Stochasitic
Rethinking
Source
Bag of
Tools
Solution
Symbolic
Memory
Symbolic
Language
Solution
QueryInput
LoopLoop
Question
(Task)
Multiple
Solutions
Loop
Task-related
SymbolicMemory
Source
Space Time
Solution 1
Solution 2
…
PlannerPlanner
HuggingGPT
ChatDB
Symbolic memoryOurs
Question
(Task)
Question
(Task)
Other Tools
Sub-taskTools
…WhyHow
Memory
Construction
(a) Na¨ıve planners
Stochasitic
Rethinking
Source
Bag of
Tools
Solution
Symbolic
Memory
Symbolic
Language
Solution
QueryInput
LoopLoop
Question
(Task)
Multiple
Solutions
Loop
Task-related
SymbolicMemory
Source
Space Time
Solution 1
Solution 2
…
PlannerPlanner
HuggingGPT
ChatDB
Symbolic memoryOurs
Question
(Task)
Question
(Task)
Other Tools
Sub-taskTools
…WhyHow
Memory
Construction (b) w/ symbolic memory
MCTS
Planner
Source
Bag of
Tools
Solution
Symbolic
Memory
Symbolic
Language
Solution
QueryInput
LoopLoop
Question
(Task)
Multiple
Solutions
Loop
Task-related
SymbolicMemory
Source
Space Time
Solution 1
Solution 2
…
PlannerPlanner
HuggingGPT
ChatDB
Symbolic memoryOurs
Question
(Task)
Question
(Task)
Memory
Construction
Knowledge Tools
Sub-taskTools
…WhyHow (c) DoraemonGPT (ours)
Figure 1: (a) Na ¨ıve LLM-driven planners ( e.g., [9–11]) decompose a static image task to a se-
quence of tool executions, while real-world environments are inherently dynamic. (b) Planners with
symbolic memory ( e.g., [17, 36, 37]) iteratively generate symbolic languages to retrieve external
knowledge or information. (c) Regarding a given dynamic video task, our DoraemonGPT (§3)
decouples spatial-temporal attributes into task-related memories. Instead of generating symbolic
languages directly, sub-task (symbolic) tools for different kinds of spatial-temporal reasoning (e.g.,
“Why... ”, “How... ”) and other tools (e.g., for retrieving external knowledge) are planned to solve the
task. By introducing the MCTS planner, DoraemonGPT can explore the large planning space, find
potential solutions, and deliver an improved final answer.
shares a similar spirit of decomposing complex tasks into simpler ones, but it is designed to solve
complicated tasks for dynamic modalities in the real-world senarios.
LLM-driven Modular Systems. Deconstructing complex tasks and merging the results from mul-
tiple intermediate steps is an innate human ability that drives the scientific and industrial communi-
ties [58, 59]. Benefiting from the impressive emergent capabilities of LLMs, VisProg [11] pioneers
the idea of addressing complex vision tasks through the decomposition of questions into manageable
subtasks. Alongthisline, tremendousprogresshasbeenachieved, which can be divided into two cate-
gories according to reasoning styles: i) Reasoning with fixed paths[9–11, 60–62]. They transform the
given task into a ordered sequence of subtasks, each addressed by a specific module. For example,
ViperGPT[9] treats the solving process as a Python program with manually designed APIs. Similarly,
HuggingGPT [10] models task dependencies between numerous foundation models. ii) Reasoning
with dynamic paths [19, 63–66]. Considering the intermediate results may not meet expectations, a
promising avenue is to perform planning and executing concurrently. Such an interactive paradigm[19]
provides a flexible and error-tolerant manner compared to those with fixed paths. Additionally, there
are many agents focussing on other domains,e.g., planning in the open-world environments [67–69],
tool usage [70, 71], reinforcement learning [20, 72]. This work focuses on computer vision only.
Despite impressive, existing LLM-driven modular systems mainly focus on developing specific stra-
tegies to solve composition tasks forstatic modalities, ignoring the fundamental gaps between static
and dynamic modalities, which is a pivotal aspect towards achieving artificial general intelligence
(AGI) [73]. These works, to some extent, can be seen as a subset of our system. Though exceptions
exist [9, 35, 66, 74], in general they are scattered, lacking systematic study, e.g., simply treating the
video as a sequence of images [9] or building a chatbot based on pre-extracted information of the given
video [35, 74]. In sharp contrast, we take the video and task as a whole, resulting in a compact,task-
related memory. The reasoning paths of our system are dynamic powered by the MCTS planner. In
addition to facilitate the answer searching, MCTS planner has the potential to find multiple possible
candidates. This is crucial for questions with open-ended answer.
LLMs with External Memory. How to effectively design prompt templates, known as prompt eng-
nieering, is of importance for accurate LLM responses [75, 76]. One of the areas in the spotlight is
memory-augmented LLMs [36, 37, 69, 77–84]. In general, training-free memories can be divided
into: i) Textual memory [69, 85]. In this kind of memory, the long contexts LLMs cannot handle
(e.g., books) are stored as embeddings, which can be further retrieved by computing similarity. A
typical example is the document question answering shown in LangChain1. ii) Symbolic memory. It
models memory as structured represtations with corresponding symbolic languages, e.g., codes for
programing language [84], execution commands for Excel 2, and structured query language (SQL)
for databases [36, 37]. Different from techniques [86–93] that directly extend the context window
1https://docs.langchain.com/docs/use-cases/qa-docs
2https://chatexcel.com/
3

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Video
“Describe the experiment and its chemical
principle. Provide step-by-step instructions
sothatIcanreplicateit athome.”
Question / Task
Task-related Symbolic Memory
Memory
Construction task-relatedinput
Space-dominant Time-dominant
relatedunrelated
00:00-00:03
Caption
……Elephanttoothpasteis…
Audio
A man ina white coat is...
……
ID:01
Action
……AtFrame0:[0.39,0.16,…
Trajectory
SpeakingandStanding
Person
……
Sub-task Tools
When Why
HowWhat
Count
Other
Other Tools
External Knowledges
Utility Tools
MonteCorloTreeSearchPlanner
Question:Describe the
experiment and its ……
Action:TextualKnowledge
Input:Bring_Science_Home.txt
Observation:MakeElephant
Toothpaste:Abubblyscience…
Action:GoogleSearch
Input:Thedetailedstepof…
Observation:…ifyouwantto
getyourfoamstripeslike…
Action:Time-dominantConstruction
Input:video.mp4&Describethe…
Observation:Builttime-dominant…
Action:How
Input:Howtoreplicatethe…
Observation:Toreplicatethis
experimentathome,please…
Summarize(N=3)
Finalanswer 1:The
experimentdonein
thevideoiselephant
toothpaste.To
replicateathome,
pleasegatherthe…
Finalanswer 2:
Elephant Toothpaste
is an impressive
chemical reaction
that involves rapid
decompositionof…
Finalanswer 3:
Thedemonstration
iscalledElephant’s
Toothpastebecause
thechemicalreaction
producesalarge…
Action:What
Input:What’stheexperiment?
Observation:Theexperimentis
elephanttoothpaste…
Action:What
Input:What’sthechemical
principlebehindtheexperiment.
Observation:Theelephant…
Figure 2: Overview. Given a video with a question/task, DoraemonGPT first extracts a Task-related
Symbolic Memory (§3.1), which has two types of memory for selection: space-dominant mem-
ory based on instances and time-dominant memory based on time frames/clips. The memory can
be queried by sub-task tools, which are driven by LLMs [1] with different prompts and generate
symbolic language ( i.e., SQL sentences) to do different reasoning. Also, other tools for querying
external knowledge (§3.2) or utility tools are supported. For planning, DoraemonGPT employs the
MCTS Planner (§3.3) to decompose the question into an action sequence by exploring multiple fea-
sibleN solutions, which can be further summarized into an informative answer.
of LLMs, memory-augmented LLMs use retrieval-based approaches to bypass the limitation of con-
text length. This is more favored because: (i) it is a plug-and-play module without any fine-tuning or
architectural modifications; and (ii) concurrent works [18, 94] suggest that LLMs may be distracted
or lost while encounting irrelevant or long contexts. By absorbing their ideas of memory organi-
zation, we construct a request-related database, which stores intance-aware and instance-agnostic
information into indivisual tables. To retrieve the relevant information, we explicitly define seve-
ral sub-task tools based on prompt templates and SQL, with respect to different purposes. With a
broader view, our multi-source knowledge, which is a complementary module to provide reliable
guidances in specific domains, can also be considered as a hybrid of external memories.
3 D ORAEMON GPT
Overview. DoraemonGPT is an LLM-driven agent capable of seamlessly utilizing various tools to
decompose a complex dynamic video task into sub-tasks and solve them. Given a video (V ) with a
textual task/question (Q), DoraemonGPT first extracts a Task-related Symbolic Memory (§3.1) from
V based on the task analysis of Q. Next, employing a Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) Planner
(§3.3), DoraemonGPT automatically schedules the tool sets for querying the symbolic memory,
accessing external knowledge (§3.2), and calling other utility tools (such as video inpainting,etc.) to
solve the questionQ. Ultimately, the planner explores the planning space, returns multiple possible
answers, and summarizes an improved answer. An illustration is shown in Fig. 2.
3.1 T ASK -RELATED SYMBOLIC MEMORY (TSM)
Videos are complex dynamic data, including spatial-temporal relations. When giving a question Q
regarding a videoV , only a part of related attributes is essential for making a solution, disregarding
the abundance of extraneous information. Thus, we propose to extract and store potentially relevant
video information regardingQ into a TSM before solvingQ.
4

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Table 1: The attribute types in space-dominant and time-dominant memories (§3.1). Each attribute
is extracted or predicted based on different foundation models.
Attribute Used Model Explanation
Space-dominant Memory
ID number - A unique ID assigned to an instance
Category YOLOv8 [95] The category of an instance, e.g., person
Trajectory Deep OC-Sort [96] An instance’s bounding box in each frame
Segmentation YOLOv8-Seg [95] An instance’s segmentation mask in each frame
Appearance BLIP [54] / BLIP-2 [55] A description of an instance’s appearance
Action InternVideo [97] The action of an instance
Time-dominant Memory
Timestamp - The timestap of a frame/clip
Audio content Whisper [98] Speech recognition results of the video
Optical content OCR [99] Optical character recognition results of the video
Captioning BLIP [54]/BLIP-2 [55]/
InstructBlip [100] Frame-level/clip-level captioning results
TSM Construction. To construct the TSM, we use a straightforward in-context learning
method [51] to select the task type of TSM based on the question Q. We place the task
description of each type of TSK into the context of our LLM-driven planner, which will be
prompted to predict a suitable TSM in the format like “Action:⟨TSM type⟩ construction... ”. Then,
the API of constructing the corresponding TSM will be called to extract task-related attributes and
store them in an SQL table, which can be accessed by symbolic languages, i.e., SQL sentences.
There is no standardized criterion for categorizing video tasks. In DeoraemonGPT, we choose the
perspective of spatial-temporal decoupling, which has been widely applied in video representation
learning [101–103], to design two memory types:
• Space-dominant memory is primarily used to address questions related to specific targets ( e.g.,
persons or animals) or their spatial relations. We use multi-object tracking methods [96] to detect
and track instances. Each instance has attributes that include unique ID, semantic category,
trajectory & segmetnation for localization, appearance description extracted by [54, 55]
and used for text-based grounding, and action classification.
• Time-dominant memory focuses on constructing temporal-related information of the video re-
garding the question. It requires comprehending the content throughout the video. The attributes
stored in this memory include timestamp, audio content by ASR [98], optical content
by OCR [99], frame-level captioning by [54, 55, 100], clip-level captioning by dedupicating
similar and continuous frame-level results, etc.
Table 1 provides the attribute types with corresponding extraction models of our TSMs.
Sub-task Tools. Although LLM-driven agents [35, 36] can assess external information by in-context
learning of the whole memory or generating symbolic sentences to access the memory, these meth-
ods can significantly increase the length of the context, potentially leading to the omission of cru-
cial information in the reasoning process or being influenced by redundant context. Thus, we pro-
vide a series of sub-task tools responsible for querying information from our TSMs [18, 94] by
answering sub-task questions. The LLM-driven planner learns the function of each sub-task tool
through its in-context description, which describes the sub-task description, tool name,
and tool inputs. To call the API of a sub-task tool, DoraemonGPT parses the command generated
by LLMs, like “Action:⟨tool name⟩. Input:⟨video name⟩#⟨sub question⟩... ”.
To collaborate with the above two kinds of TSMs, we design sub-task tools with different
sub-task description and for solving different sub-questions, including:
• When: related to temporal understanding, e.g., “When the dog walks past by the sofa?”
• Why: related to causal reasoning, e.g., “Why did the lady shake the toy?”
• What: describing the required information, e.g., “What’s the name of the experiment?”
• How: what manner, means, or quality of something,e.g., “How does the baby keep himself safe?”
• Count: counting something, e.g., “How many people in the room?”
• Other: questions not in the above tools, e.g., “Who slides farther at the end?”
The API functions of these tools are built upon LLMs as well. Each sub-task tool function is an
individual LLM-driven agent, which can generate SQL sentences to query our TSMs and answer
5

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
the given sub-task question. Different sub-task agents have different in-context examples regarding
their purposes. Note that a sub-question may be suitable for two or more sub-tools (e.g., “What was
the baby doing before playing the toy?” , related to what and when), and our MCTS planner (§3.3)
is capable of exploring different selections.
3.2 K NOWLEDGE TOOLS AND OTHERS
When tackling complex problems, LLM-driven agents sometimes fail to make accurate decisions
solely based on video understanding and the implicit knowledge learned by LLMs during training.
Thus, DoraemonGPT supports the integration of external knowledge sources that can assist the
LLM in comprehending the specialized content within the input video/question. In DoraemonGPT,
a knowledge source can be integrated in a plug-and-play manner by using an individual knowledge
tool. Similar to the sub-task tools (§3.1), a knowledge tool consists of two parts: i) an in-context
knowledge description to describe the given knowledge source and ii) an API function to
query information from the source by question answering.
We consider three types of API function for covering different knowledge: i) symbolic knowl-
edge refers to information presented in a structured format such as Excel or SQL tables. The
API function is a symbolic question-answering sub-agent like our sub-task tools (§3.1). ii) tex-
tual knowledge encompasses knowledge expressed through natural language text, such as research
publications, reference books, etc. The API function is built based on text embedding and search-
ing [104]. iii) web knowledge denotes knowledge searched from the internet. The API function is
a search engine API, such as Google, Bing, etc. Besides the knowledge tools, DoraemonGPT also
supports integrating general utility tools, commonly used in recent LLM-driven agents [57], to help
complete more specialized vision tasks, such as video editing, inpainting, etc.
3.3 M ONTE CARLO TREE SEARCH (MCTS) P LANNER
Previous LLM-driven planners [9–11] decompose the givenQ into an action/sub-task sequence and
solve it step by step. Such a strategy can be seen as a greedy search method which generates a
chain of action nodes until the final answer. However, we consider the large planning space of
solving dynamic video tasks as a tree, and a single attempt may not yield the correct result, or better
solutions may exist. To efficiently explore the planning space, we propose a novel tree-search-like
planner equipped with MCTS [27–29], which has shown its practicality in searching large trees.
We define the question input Q as the root node v0, and an action or tool call is a non-root node,
then an action sequence can be viewed as a path from the root node to a leaf node. In our MCTS
planner, a non-root node is a ReAct [19]-style step in the form of ⟨thought, action, action input,
observation⟩, and a leaf node has a final answer in addition. The planner iteratively executes the
following four phases forN times and producesN solutions:
Node Selection. Each iteration starts by selecting an expandable node for planning a new solution.
For the first iteration, only the rootv0 is selectable. For subsequent iterations, we randomly select a
non-leaf node based on their sampling probability, formulated asP (vi) = Softmax (Ri), whereRi
is the reward value of node vi initialized as 0 and updated in the Reward Back-propagation phase.
The node with a higher reward has a greater probability of being selected.
Branch Expansion. A child will be added to the selected expandable node to create a new branch.
To leverage LLM for generating a new tool call different from the previous child nodes, we add
historical tool actions into the prompt of LLM and instruct it to make a different choice. Such an
in-context prompt will be removed in the subsequent chain execution toward a new final answer.
Chain Execution. After expanding a new branch, we use a step-wise LLM-driven planner [19] to
generate a new solution. The execution process consists of a chain of steps/nodes of tool calls and
will terminate upon obtaining the final answer or encountering an execution error.
Reward Back-propagation. After obtaining a leaf/outcome node vl, we will gradually propagate
its reward to its ancestor nodes untilv0. In our method, we consider two kinds of reward:
• Failure: the planner produces an unexpected result, such as a failed tool call, incorrect result
format, etc. The rewardRvl is set to a negative value (e.g.,−1) for these cases.
6

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Table 2: Comparison of our DoraemonGPT with SOTAs on NExT-QA [34] (§4.2).†: reimplement
using the officially released codes. ∗: we filter out those failed executions ( i.e., compilation error)
of ViperGPT [9] and record the performance on successful executions (840/900 on s val). All
LLM-driven systems (LLM agent) use the same LLM, i.e., GPT-3.5-turbo.
Method Split Publication AccC AccT AccD Avg AccA
Supervised
HME [105] val CVPR 2019 46.2 48.2 58.3 50.9 48.7
VQA-T [106] val ICCV 2021 41.7 44.1 60.0 48.6 45.3
ATP [107] val CVPR 2022 53.1 50.2 66.8 56.7 54.3
VGT [108] val ECCV 2022 52.3 55.1 64.1 57.2 55.0
VGT [108] s val ECCV 2022 49.7 53.3 63.7 55.6 55.6
MIST [109] val CVPR 2023 54.6 56.6 66.9 59.3 57.2
MIST [109] s val CVPR 2023 51.7 55.3 67.0 58.0 58.0
LLM agent
†ViperGPT [9] s val ICCV 2023 29.7 37.3 47.3 38.1 38.1
∗†ViperGPT [9] ∗s val ICCV 2023 33.0 40.1 48.8 40.8 40.8
†VideoChat [35] s val - 46.7 45.3 61.0 51.0 51.0
Ours s val - 52.3 45.7 64.0 54.0 54.0
• Non-failure: the planner successfully produces a result that does not belong to failure results, but
it is not sure whether the result is correct as ground truth.Rvl is set to a positive value (e.g., 1).
For simplicity, let α be a positive base reward, we set Rvl = ±α for Failure and Non-failure,
respectively. According to [94], the outcome produced by LLMs is more related to the context at
the beginning (the initial prompts) and the end (the final nodes). We consider that more reward
should be applied to nodes close to vl. Thus, the backpropagation function is formulated as Rvi←
Rvi +Rvleβ(1−d(vi,vl)), where d(vi,vl) denotes the node distance between vi and vl, and β is a
hyper-parameter for controlling the decay rate of the reward. The further the node distance, the
greater the reward decay ratio,eβ(1−d(vi,vl)).
After all the MCTS iterations, the planner will produce N non-failure answers at most, and we
can use LLMs to summarize all the answers to generate an informative answer. Alternatively, for
single-/multiple-choice questions, we can determine the final answer through a voting process.
4 E XPERIMENT
4.1 E XPERIMENTAL SETUP
Datasets. NExT-QA [34] is a benchmark for video question answering designed to improve video
understanding by focusing on causal action reasoning, temporal action reasoning, and common
scene comprehension. It contains 34,132/4,996/8,564 questions for train/val/test. Each ques-
tion is annotated with a question type (causal/temporal/descriptive) and 5 answer candidates. Limi-
ted by the frequency of API calls with GPT-3.5 and budget, we create a balanced subset of NExT-QA
as in [11]. Concretely, for evaluation, we randomly sample up to 300 samples per question type from
the val set, resulting in a total of 900 questions (s val). For ablation studies, we randomly sample
10 samples per question type from train, resulting in a total of 30 questions (s train).
Evaluation Metric. We adopt the standard metric [34, 109], top-1 test accuracy, for evaluation. We
report accuracy for causal (Acc C), temporal (Acc T), descriptive (Acc D). We also report Avg (the
average of AccC, AccT, and AccD) and AccA (the overall accuracy of all questions).
Implementation Details. We use GPT-3.5-turbo API provided by OpenAI as our LLM. As summa-
rized in Table 1, we use BLIP series [55, 100] for captioning, YOLOv8 [95] and Deep OC-Sort [96]
for object tracking, PaddleOCR [99] for OCR, InternVideo [97] for action recognition, and Whis-
per [98] for ASR. Our experiments are conducted under the in-context learning (ICL) setting.
Competitors. We involve several open-sourced LLM-driven agents for performance comparison.
ViperGPT [9] leverages code generation models to create subroutines from vision-and-language
models through a provided API, thus it solves the given task by generating Python code that is later
executed. VideoChat [35] is an end-to-end chat-centric video understanding system that integrates
several foundation models and LLMs to build a chatbot. We do not report the performance of others
as they do not release their codes for video tasks or even open-source it.
Hyperparameters. We set α = 1 and β = 0.5 for the reward back-propagation ( cf. §3.3). For
experiments on NExT-QA, exploringN = 2 solutions has better accuracy-cost trade-offs.
7

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Video
“Find the wrong operations in this video
and explain why. Provide step-by-step
instructions sothatIcanfinishit safely.”
Question / Task
Sub-task Tools
When Why
HowWhat
Count
Other
Other Tools
External Knowledges
Utility Tool s
MonteCorloTreeSearchPlanner
Question:Find thewrong
operationsinthisvideo …
Action:What
Input:What’swrong in the
operations?
SQL:SELECTappearance
FROM …
Observation:Aperson, a vase,
at 00:00:16, …
Finalanswer 2:
… It should be handled with great
care since …
Fail to continue …
Action:What
Input:What operations were
taken in the video?
SQL:SELECTcaptioning FROM …
Observation:A person is
pouring liquid into a flask …
Fail to continue …
Action:What
Input:What operations were taken in
the video?
SQL:SELECTaudio_content FROM …
Observation:Letthe water slowly
drip into the concentrated sulfuric
acid in the bottle …
Finalanswer 1:
The wrong operation is to pour
water into pie sulfuric acid …
Action:Google Search
Input:Experiments about Diluting
concentrated sulfuric acid
Observation:… When diluting con-
centratedsulfuric acid …
Action:TextKnowledge
Input:About_diluting
concentrated_sulfuric_acid.txt
Observation:…. Never pour water
into a pie of sulfuric acid …
Summary:The wrong operation is to pour water into the pie sulfuric acid. The
experimental procedure is: 1. slowly pour concentrated sulfuric acid along the wall of the
beaker into the beaker containing water 2. stir constantly with a glass rod 3. touch the
outside of the beaker with your hand to feel the change in temperature of the solution.
Root
No. 1
No. 2
No. 3
No. 6
No. 5
No. 4
No. 7
No. 8
No. 9
Notebook
No. 10
No. 11
About_diluting
concentrated_
sulfuric_acid.txt
Action:
Time-dominantConstruction
Input:video.mp4&Findthe …
Action:
Space-dominantConstruction
Input:video.mp4&Findthe
wrongoperationsinthis…
Figure 3: An in-the-wild example of DoraemonGPT. Given a video input and a question, our system
automatically explores the solution space powered by MCTS planner and various tools. This figure
demonstrates both the utilized tools, and the result of intermediate steps during the exploration. Ta-
king advantage of the tree-like exploration paths, DoraemonGPT can not only summarize collected
answers into a better one, but also has the potential to generate multiple potential solutions. (§4.3)
Reproducibility. Our algorithm is implemented in PyTorch and LangChain and tested on an NVI
-DIA Tesla A100 GPU with 80G memory. To guarantee reproducibility, the code will be released.
4.2 Q UANTITATIVE RESULT
Table 2 presents comparisons of our DoraemonGPT against several top-leading supervised VQA
models and LLM-driven systems on NExT-QA. As can be seen, DoraemonGPT achieves com-
petitive performance compared to recently proposed supervised models. In particular, it shows
a more promising improvement in causal questions, even outperforming the previous SOTA,
MIST [109] ( 52.3 vs 51.7). The main reason is that our task-related symbolic memory can pro-
vide enough information for reasoning. In terms of temporal and descriptive questions, super-
vised models are slightly superior to ours, mainly due to their well-designed architectures that have
learned underlying patterns. In addition, DoraemonGPT outperforms recent concurrent works, i.e.,
ViperGPT [9] and VideoChat [35]. Concretely, it outperforms ViperGPT by 19.3/5.6/15.2/13.2
(AccC/AccT/AccD/Avg) and VideoChat by 5.6/0.4/3.0/3.0 across the four question types. Note that
we have filtered out the failed execution cases (60/900 on s val) of ViperGPT and only record the
performance on successful executions, which improves ViperGPT’s Avg score from 38.1 to 40.8.
These results demonstrate the efficacy of our MCTS planner based on task-related memory.
4.3 I N-THE -WILD EXAMPLE
In Fig. 3, we visualize the reasoning paths of an in-the-wild example. As depicted, DoraemonGPT
is asked to check the experimental operations shown in the video and tell the user how to finish it
step by step. Specifically, DoraemonGPT first makes two failed attempts at the beginning, i.e., the
queried SQL table or symbolic memory does not contain the information related to the sub-question.
Regarding the relevant parts, DoraemonGPT understands the experimental operations shown in the
video after expanding a new tree branch by querying a different sub-question. Then, there are two
alternative ways to get the final answer, i.e., through the textual notebook provided by users or
through a search engine. These paths generate two relevant but different final answers, which can be
further summarized into a better, more comprehensive answer. Such an exploration process shows
our system’s ability to handle questions more complex than those constructed in previous studies.
8

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
Table 3: A set of ablative experiments about the MCTS planner on NExT-QA [34]s train (§4.4).
N AccC AccT AccD AccA
1 63.3 20.0 46.7 43.3
2 80.0 43.3 46.7 56.7
3 86.7 43.3 53.3 61.1
4 96.7 46.7 53.3 65.7
5 86.7 43.3 50.0 60.0
(a) Number of answer candidates
α β AccC AccT AccD AccA
0.5 1.0 86.7 23.3 50.0 53.3
1.0 0.5 96.7 46.7 53.3 65.7
0.5 2.0 86.7 26.7 50.0 54.4
2.0 0.5 83.3 46.7 50.0 60.0
2.0 2 80.0 46.7 50.0 58.9
(b) Reward and decay rate (N = 4)
Strategy AccC AccT AccD AccA
DFS 66.7 36.7 50.0 51.1
Root 73.3 16.7 46.7 45.6
Uniform 67.7 26.7 50.0 47.8
MCTS 96.7 46.7 53.3 65.7
(c) Exploring strategy (N = 4)
4.4 D IAGNOSTIC EXPERIMENT
To gain more insightsinto DoraemonGPT,we conducta set of ablative experiments onNExT-QA[34]
Table 4: Analysis of essential components on
NExT-QA [34] s train (§4.4).
TDM SDM AccC AccT AccD AccA
✓ 63.3 26.7 53.3 47.8
✓ 53.3 23.3 46.7 41.1
✓ ✓ 96.7 46.7 53.3 65.7
s train by randomly select 90 videos.
Task-related Symbolic Memory. First, we inve-
stigate the essential components in DoraemonGPT,
i.e., symbolic memories (§3.1) for space-dominant
(SDM) and time-dominant (TDM) information. The
results are summarized in Table 4. Two crucial con-
clusions can be drawn. First, TDM is more pre-
ferred for temporal questions, while SDM can provide relevant information for descriptive ques-
tions. Second, our complete system achieves the best performance by combining our SDM and
TDM, confirming the necessity of dynamically querying two types of symbolic memory.
Multiple Solutions by MCTS Planner . We next study the influence of the number of answer can-
didates during the exploring process of our MCTS planner. When N = 1, the planner is equivalent
to a greedy search, explores only a chain of nodes, and returns a single answer – the first node in
LLM’s thinking that can be terminated without further exploration. As shown in Table 3a, gradually
increasing N from 1 to 4 leads to better performance (i.e., 43.3 → 65.7). This supports our hy-
pothesis that one single answer is far from enough to handle the larger planning space for dynamic
modalities and proves the efficacy of our MCTS planner. Since the questions in NExT-QA [34] are
single-choice, exploring more answers does not always result in positive returns. We stop using N
> 5 as the required number of API calls exceeds our budget.
Back-propogation in MCTS Planner . Then, we ablate the effect of the base reward α and decay
rateβ (cf. §3.3) that control the exploring procedure of our MCTS planner. As reported in Table 3b,
their performance is stable regardless of the combination ofα andβ used. Hence, we set the slightly
better one, α = 1 and β = 0.5, as our default setting. We leave some special combinations in the
next part (e.g., our MCTS planner becomes the depth-first search ( DFS) when settingβ = 10 8 and
Rvl = 1 for both Failure and Non-failure cases).
Exploring Strategies used by Planner . Last, to verify the advantage of our MCTS planner, we
compare MCTS with several standard exploring strategies,i.e., depth-first search (DFS), Root, which
always selects the root node, and Uniform, which samples a node with equal probability. As shown
in Table 3c, we observe that their performance is suboptimal due to the inability to leverage the
value/reward of the outcome leaf nodes and accordingly adjust their searching strategy. Compared
to these na¨ıve strategies, our MCTS planner adaptively samples a node with the guidance of reward
back-propagation, which is more effective in a large solution space. These results further validate
the superiority of the proposed MCTS planner.
5 C ONCLUSION
Regarding real-world scenarios’ dynamic and ever-changing nature, we present DoraemonGPT, an
LLM-driven agent for solving dynamic video tasks. Compared to existing LLM-driven visual mod-
ular systems, DoraemonGPT has merits in: i) conceptually elegant system designed by delving into
the dynamic modalities in our lives; ii) compact task-related symbolic memory by decoupling, ex-
tracting, and storing spatial-temporal attributes; iii) effective and decomposed memory querying
through symbolic sub-task tools; iv plug-and-play knowledge tools for accessing domain-specific
knowledge; v) automated exploration of large planning space using MCTS planner, providing mul-
tiple solutions with an informative final answer; and vi) answer diversity that provides multiple
potential candidates by fully exploring the solution space. Experiments confirm the versatility and
effectiveness of DoraemonGPT for solving complicated tasks in dynamic scenes.
9

Under review as a conference paper at ICLR 2024
