record_id: s2:af598689eb28fe0de48f14a6f1b302ff86ac5fe9
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/0802.2025
fetched_title: Use of cumulants to quantify uncertainties in the HBT measurements of the homogeneity regions
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:06Z

arXiv:0802.2025v1 [hep-ph] 14 Feb 2008
Use of cumulants to quantify uncertainties in
the HBT measurements of the homogeneity
regions
K.Zalewski
M.Smoluchowski Institute of Physics
Jagellonian University, Cracow∗
and
Institute of Nuclear Physics, Cracow
October 30, 2018
Abstract
Let us denote by p(x|K) the space density of the points where
identical particles of some kind, e.g. π+ mesons, with momentum K
are produced. When using the HBT method to determine p(x|K)
one encounters ambiguities. We show that these ambiguities do not
aﬀect the even cumulants of the distribution p(x|K). In particular, the
HBT radii of the homogeneity regions, which are given by the s econd
order cumulants, and the distribution of distances between the pairs
of production points for particles with momentum K can be reliably
measured. The odd cumulants are ambiguous. They are, howeve r,
correlated. In particular, when the average position ⟨x⟩(K) is known
as a function of K there is no further ambiguity.
PACS numbers 25.75.Gz, 13.65.+i
Bose-Einstein correlations, interaction region determination.
∗Address: Reymonta 4, 30 059 Krakow, Poland, e-mail: zalewski@th.if .uj.edu.pl. This
work has been partly supported by the Polish Ministry of Education a nd Science grant
1P03B 045 29(2005-2008).
1

1 Introduction
Femtoscopy, i.e. the study of momentum correlations among partic les at
small relative velocities in order to get information about the interac tion re-
gions where the hadrons are produced, is now considered so import ant that
workshops devoted to correlations and femtoscopy are organize d every year
(see e.g. [1]). The HBT method is the oldest and much used tool of fem -
toscopy. For reviews with hundreds of references see e.g. [2, 3, 4, 5]. There is
a variety of models which predict the correlation functions depending on some
parameters. Fitting these parameters to the data one obtains inf ormation
about the interaction regions. Much less attention has been devot ed to the
problem: given the data what can be deduced without using a speciﬁc model.
A well-known, important result is that very little can be learned about the
whole interaction region. It is much more fruitful to concentrate o n the ho-
mogeneity regions. Homogeneity region K is the region where hadrons with
momentum K are produced. For a homogeneity region, much information
with little model dependence can be obtained using the imaging method (see
[6] and references quoted there). The imaging method, however, yields the
distribution of distances between the points where identical hadro ns with a
given momentum are produced. This is less information than containe d in
the distribution of the production points themselves. Therefore, the question
arises: can one go any further and if not what information from mod els must
be added?
Let us denote p(x|K) the probability distribution for the points where
the hadrons (of the type considered) with momentum K are produced in
a given kind of interaction. We will call p(x|K) the proﬁle of homogeneity
region K. Barring some pathological cases, the proﬁle can be unambiguously
determined when all its moments are known. All the moments can be u n-
ambiguously determined when all the cumulants are known. In the pr esent
paper we concentrate on cumulants. We ﬁnd that all the even cumu lants
can be unambiguously determined from the data - i.e they are measur able.
This implies in particular two important, known results. The famous HB T
radii and the distribution of distances between the production poin ts are
measurable. Actually, knowing the distribution of distances is equiva lent
to knowing all the even culmulants. A single odd cumulant is not measur -
able. In particular, the K dependence of the ﬁrst order cumulants, which are
equal to the components of the the ﬁrst order moments ⟨x⟩(K), can have an
arbitrary dependence on K. This implies, as a very special case, the well-
2

known result that the position of the center of the whole interaction region is
not measurable. Changing the relative positions of the homogeneity regions,
however, one usually has to change their shapes accordingly. Unles s p(x|K)
is a Gaussian, rigid shifts of the homogeneity regions with respect to each
other are not allowed. For an example where the skewness gets cha nged see
[7]. The common knowledge is (cf. e.g. [4]) that the correlation functio ns
can provide at best the distribution of the relative positions of part icles with
identical velocities. We ﬁnd that for given ⟨x⟩(K) the full proﬁles p(x|K)
can be measured. This result may be useful. Macroscopic models, like the
hydrodynamical ones, are more likely to predict correctly the K-dependence
of the positions of the homogeneity regions than ﬁner details of the ir shapes.
According to our result, however, function p(x|K) is measurable when the
input includes ⟨x⟩(K) for every K.
Our analysis is based on two main assumptions. One is that formula
(9) is approximately valid. This can be interpreted as the assumption that,
besides the Bose-Einstein correlations, the particles are uncorre lated. The
other assumption is that formulae (2) and (3) are approximately co nsistent.
This is known to be true when we are suﬃciently close to the classical lim it.
Both these assumptions hold for a broad class of models. Our result s are
model independent for models within this class.
2 Basic formulae and assumptions
The probability of emitting at time t a particle with momentum K from
space-time point X is given by the emission function S(X, K) [4], [8]. Since
the particles are emitted on mass shell, we have
K 0 = E(K) ≡
√
m2 + K2, (1)
where m is the particle mass. With this deﬁnition, the unnormalized proﬁle
of homogeneity region K, i.e. the space distribution of points where the
identical hadrons, say π+ mesons, with momentum K have been produced,
is given by the integral over time
p(X|K) =
∫ +∞
−∞
dt S (X, t, K). (2)
This proﬁle diﬀers only by an X-independent factor from the proﬁle p(X|K),
normalized to one at each K. Therefore, either proﬁle can be used to describe
3

the homogeneity regions. In this section we changed the notation f or the po-
sition vector from x to X. This has been done to improve the correspondence
with the other deﬁnition of the emission function described below. Ac tually,
unless the sources are point-like in space-time, X in the following is not quite
the position vector of a particle, but our basic assumption is that th e two
deﬁnitions of S are, with suﬃcient accuracy, consistent. Then, except in the
integrands of next three formulae, x and X can be used exchangeably.
On the other hand one uses [4], [8] the formula
S(X, K) =
∑
F
∫
d4y T ∗
F (X + 1
2 y)TF(X − 1
2 y)eiKy , (3)
where the sum is over the states of all the other particles in the sys tem.
Following [8] we make the approximation that each source can emit a par-
ticle only at one time, though diﬀerent sources may emit particles at diﬀerent
times. This assumption of instant sources cannot be rigorously true, it would
contradict Heisenberg’s uncertainty relations, but as an approxim ation it is
in the spirit of the models being used. Thus e.g. Kopylov and Podgoretsky in
their classical paper [9] explicitly introduce long-lived sources, but t hen they
average over an internal, unmeasurable parameter ( E) which makes these
sources equivalent (for the HBT analysis!) to sets of instant sourc es. Many
papers go even further and use sources which are, or can be deco mposed
into sources, point-like in space-time [4], [10]. A general derivation of the
relation between correlation functions and emission functions, whic h is still
[6] considered to be the most detailed, has been given by Anchishkin, Heinz
and Renk [11]. Analyzing it one easily ﬁnds that the proof breaks down if
the sources are not, or at least for the HBT analysis cannot be rep laced by,
instant sources. One also ﬁnds [12] that S for coherent sources extended in
time cannot be interpreted as a phase space density of the particles produced
at a given time.
For instant sources the time component y0 of y is zero by assumption.
Therefore, the integration over y0 and the term K0y0 in the exponent drop
out. Denoting by ti the time when a source ﬁres and using the labels Fi for
the sources that ﬁre at t = ti we get
S(X, ti, K) =
∫
d3y
∑
Fi
T ∗
Fi(X + 1
2 y)TFi(X − 1
2y)e− iK·y. (4)
Usually ti is considered a continuous variable, but for comparison with the
4

Wigner function it is more convenient to start with discrete time varia bles
and, if necessary, introduce the continuous variables later.
The sum over Fi yields a result proportional to the complex conjugate of
the corresponding density matrix. Denoting the (real, non-negat ive) propor-
tionality coeﬃcients by N(ti) one gets
S(X, ti, K) = N(ti)
∫
d3y ρ ∗(X + 1
2 y, X − 1
2 y))e− iK·y = N(ti)W (X, ti, K).
(5)
Actually, the integration d3y yields the complex conjugate of the Wigner
function. Since, however, the Wigner function is real the second e quality is
correct. Summation over ti yields
p(X|K) = N W(X, K), (6)
where the Wigner function W (X, K) is the average over the Wigner functions
W (X, ti, K) and N is a K-dependent normalization factor chosen so that for
every K the probability distribution p(X|K) is normalized to one as it should.
This result shows that the deﬁnition of the emission function as a pha se
space density, used to derive formula (2), is only approximately con sistent
with (3). A Wigner function is not a classical distribution. It can take nega-
tive values, it is bounded by the condition |W (X, K)| < π − 3 etc. Moreover,
condition (1) is automatically satisﬁed for the density, while for the W igner
function K 0 = 1
2(p0
1 + p0
2), where both p1 and p2 are on mass shell, can sat-
isfy (1) only approximately for small |q|. Using the Wigner function for the
phase space distribution can be justiﬁed in the classical limit [13]. Crud e
estimates (cf. e.g. [14]) suggest that it is a very good approximation for the
homogeneity regions in heavy ion scattering, though not necessar ily so for
much smaller interaction regions as e.g. in pp or e+e− scattering.
The standard relation between Wigner functions and density matric es
yields
ρ(K, q) = ρ(K, 0)
∫
d3X p (X|K)e− iq·X, (7)
where
K = 1
2(p1 + p2), q = p1 − p2 (8)
5

and ρ(K, q) is the density matrix corresponding to the Wigner function
W (X, K).
Using the HBT method one gets information about the density matrix
ρ(K, q) from the measured two-, and sometimes more-, particle correlat ion
functions. In most models, when ﬁnal state interactions including r esonance
production are neglected or corrected for, the basic formula is [15 ]
P (p1, . . . ,pn) = Cn
∑
P
n∏
j=1
ρ(pj, pP j), (9)
where P (p1, . . . ,pn) is the n-particle probability distribution, the summa-
tion is over the n! permutations of the indices j and Cn are normalization
constants.
When this density matrix is known, the proﬁles of the homogeneity re -
gions p(X|K) can be obtained by inverting the Fourier transformation. There
are, however, ambiguities in the determination of the density matrixfrom the
data. The ﬁts to the data do not change under the transformatio ns [7], [16]
ρ(K, q) → eif (p1)ρ(K, q)e− if (p2), (10)
where f can be any real-valued function. They are also invariant under
complex conjugation of the density matrix, but this is less interesting since it
corresponds just to a space inversion of the homogeneity region. Conversely,
(10) and complex conjugation are the only transformations of the density
matrix which leave the probabilities (9) unchanged [16]. The purpose o f the
present paper is to quantify the ambiguities in the proﬁles p(X|K) due to
the ambiguity (10).
3 Results
In the terminology of the calculus of probabilities, relation (7) means that,
at given K, ρ(K, q)/ρ(K, 0) is the characteristic function of the distribu-
tion p(x|K). The expansion of the logarithm of the characteristic function
in powers of the components of q yields the cumulants K(rx, ry, rz) of the
distribution p(x|K):
log ρ(K, q) =
∑
rx,ry,rz
qrx
x
rx!
qry
y
ry!
qrz
z
rz! irK(rx, ry, rz) + logρ(K, 0). (11)
6

We introduce the notation r = rx + ry + rz and call a cumulant even (odd)
when r is even (odd). Let us rewrite the logarithm of the density matrix in
the form
log ρ(K, q) = log ρ0(K, q) + iχ(K, q), (12)
where both χ and ρ0 are real. The hermiticity of the density matrix implies
that ρ0 is an even function of q and χ is an odd function of q. Thus, ρ0
yields the even cumulants and χ the odd cumulants. Since the ambiguity
(10) aﬀects only χ, the even cumulants can be unambiguously found using the
HBT method. This is our ﬁrst result. A notable case are the r = 2 cumulants
which yield the famous HBT radii (see e.g. [2]). The measurability of the
HBT radii has been already pointed out in [7]. Another useful implicat ion
is the measurability the distribution of distances between pairs of po ints
where particles with given momentum K are produced. The corresponding
characteristic function is
φ(q|K) =
∫
d3X1d3X2p(X1|K)p(X2|K)eiq(X1− X2) = ρ(K, q)ρ(K, −q)
(ρ(K, 0))2 .
(13)
The log φ(q|K) is an even function of q, therefore, all the odd cumulants van-
ish, while the even ones are just twice the measurable cumulants of p(x|K).
This well-known result is basic for the method of imaging (cf. e.g. [6]). I n
the present derivation the smoothness assumption is replaced by t he closely
related assumption that formulae (2) and (3) can be simultaneously used.
The general formula for the unmeasurable contributions from fun ction f
to the cumulants is
δK(rx, ry, rz) =
(−i
2
)r− 1 ∂rf(K)
∂K rx
x ∂K ry
y ∂K rz
z
1 − (−1)r
2 . (14)
The r = 1 cumulants give ⟨x⟩(K), i.e. the position of the center of the
homogeneity region as a function of K. The unmeasurable parts of these
cumulants yields for the uncertainty of position
δ⟨x⟩(K) = ∇f(K). (15)
Formally, this is analogous to the uncertainty of the electromagnet ic vec-
tor potential due to the freedom of time-independent gauge tran sformations.
7

E.g. it is possible to choose f(K) so that for every homogeneity region
⟨z⟩ = 0. The diﬀerence is, however, that in electrodynamics the choice o f
gauge does not aﬀect the physics and is purely a matter of convenience, while
here only one choice of f(K), except for an irrelevant additive constant, is
correct and yields the true proﬁles of the homogeneity regions. Sin ce ex-
perimental momentum distributions give no information about f(K), this
function must be deduced from theory or from a model. As seen fro m (15),
it is enough to ﬁx the function ⟨x⟩(K), because then δ⟨x⟩(K) ≡ 0, f reduces
to a constant and all the cumulants can be unambiguously calculated . Con-
sequently, the full proﬁles p(x|K) are measurable. It should be kept in mind
that changing f(K) does not mean only shifting the homogeneity regions
with respect to each other. In general, the higher cumulants also c hange
and consequently the homogeneity regions are not only shifted, bu t also de-
formed. A one-dimensional example where the change aﬀects the ﬁ rst and
third order cumulants has been discussed and illustrated by a ﬁgure in [7].
From the two-body correlation function one can obtain ρ0(K, q) - the
absolute value of the density matrix. Often it is assumed, usually implic itly,
that ρ0 can be used as an approximation for the true density matrix ρ. As
seen from our analysis, ρ0 yields correctly all the even cumulants and thus
embodies all the information contained in the distribution of distance s be-
tween the points where the hadrons have been produced. Replacin g ρ by ρ0
implies also, however, putting arbitrarily all the odd cumulants equal zero.
This may lead to disagreement with experiment for the three-partic le cor-
relation function (cf. e.g. the review [2] ). If the three-particle co rrelation
function happens to be reproduced correctly and if assumption (9 ) holds,
there will be also agreement with experiment for all the more-partic le cor-
relation functions [16]. The proﬁles may be still wrong, however, bec ause of
the ambiguity (10).
4 Conclusions
Let us summarize our conclusions. All the even cumulants of the pro ﬁles
p(x|K) are unambiguously measurable. This implies in particular the mea-
surability of the HBT radii and of the distributions of distances betw een
points where the identical particles with the same momenta are prod uced.
These results are known, but we give a new, very simple proof which c learly
exhibits the necessary assumptions.
8

The odd cumulants, though separately not measurable, are stron gly cor-
related with each other. In particular, it is enough to know the posit ions of
the centers of all the homogeneity regions ⟨x⟩(K), in order to reconstruct the
full proﬁles p(x|K). Our analysis justiﬁes the following recipe.
Prepare as input: the data on the single-particle momentum distribu -
tions, the two-body and the three-body correlation functions an d a distribu-
tion ⟨x⟩(K) assumed to be correct. More-particle correlation functions cou ld
be used to reduce the statistical errors, but in principle they are r edundant.
Use any model which reproduces correctly the experimental input to ﬁnd
a density matrix ρin(K, q). This will be one of the inﬁnitely many density
matrices giving exactly the same ﬁt to the data, but in general very diﬀerent
proﬁles of the homogeneity regions. Use this matrix to calculate the three
components of the ﬁrst moment ⟨x⟩in(K). The subscript in is used to dis-
tinguish the moments given by the model from the true moments con tained
in the input. Calculate the correction
δ⟨x⟩(K) = ⟨x⟩(K) − ⟨x⟩in(K) (16)
Substitute it into (15) and solve for f(K). Correct the density matrix ρin
according to (10). Substitute the corrected density matrix into ( 7) and solve
for p(x|K) by inverting the Fourier transformation.
Acknowledgements
The author thanks A. Bialas for helpful comments.
