record_id: s2:34df9357b07509c5513420259f9c360925a63b75
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2512.12279
fetched_title: W ATOS: Efficient LLM Training Strategies and Architecture Co-exploration for Wafer-scale Chip
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:53Z

2026 IEEE International Symposium on High-Performance Computer Architecture (HPCA)
W ATOS: Efficient LLM Training Strategies and
Architecture Co-exploration for Wafer-scale Chip
Huizheng Wang†, Zichuan Wang†, Hongbin Wang†, Jingxiang Hou†, Taiquan Wei†, Chao Li‡,
Yang Hu†B, Shouyi Yin†∗
†School of Integrated Circuits, BNRist, Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, 100084
‡School of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, China, 200240
∗Shanghai Artificial Intelligence Laboratory, Shanghai, China, 200433
BCorresponding author, hu yang@tsinghua.edu.cn
Abstract—Training large language models (LLMs) imposes ex-
treme demands on computation, memory capacity, and intercon-
nect bandwidth, driven by their ever-increasing parameter scales
and intensive data movement. Wafer-scale integration offers a
promising solution by densely integrating multiple single-die
chips with high-speed die-to-die (D2D) interconnects. However,
the limited wafer area necessitates trade-offs among compute,
memory, and communication resources. Fully harnessing the po-
tential of wafer-scale integration while mitigating its architectural
constraints is essential for maximizing LLM training perfor-
mance. This imposes significant challenges for the co-optimization
of architecture and training strategies. Unfortunately, existing
approaches all fall short in addressing these challenges.
To bridge the gap, we propose W ATOS, a co-exploration
framework for LLM training strategy and wafer-scale architec-
ture. We first define a highly configurable hardware template
designed to explore optimal architectural parameters for wafer-
scale chips. Based on it, we capitalize on the high D2D bandwidth
and fine-grained operation advantages inherent to wafer-scale
chips to explore optimal parallelism and resource allocation
strategies, effectively addressing the memory underutilization
issues during LLM training. Compared to the state-of-the-
art (SOTA) LLM training framework Megatron and Cerebras’
weight streaming wafer training strategy, W ATOS can achieve
an average overall throughput improvement of2.74×and1.53×
across various LLM models, respectively. In addition, we leverage
W ATOS to reveal intriguing insights about wafer-scale architec-
ture design with the training of LLM workloads.
I. INTRODUCTION
Large language models (LLMs) have emerged as pivotal
components in advancing AI in recent years [19, 123]. Their
success is primarily attributed to unprecedented model scales,
which impose substantial demands on computation, band-
width, and memory resources [139, 141]. Unfortunately, with
the slowing of Moore’s Law [87] and the limited photomask
size [150], monolithic devices increasingly struggle to provide
the necessary transistor density and memory capacity to sup-
port LLM training efficiently [30, 70].
Wafer-scale chips (WSCs) [40], using advanced packaging
technologies such as Chip-on-Wafer-on-Substrate (CoWoS)
[44] to scale up the chip area, delivering a promising solution
to overcome these limitations and enable continuous transistor
integration. Currently, UCLA’s wafer-scale processor [102],
wafer-scale GPU [103], Tesla Dojo [127], Cerebras WSE
series [73, 74, 79] and TSMC SoW-X [121] have been
LLaMa3 70B Deepseek 671B
Training Performance of NVL72 Blackwell GPUs and WSCs
2.62×
Norm. Latency
GPU Comp GPU Exposed Comm Wafer Comp Wafer Exposed CommGPU Comp GPU Exposed Comm Wafer Comp Wafer Exposed Comm
0
10
20
30
Fig. 1. Comparison of normalized training latency between NVL72 GB300
and WSCs under various parallelism configurations. The configuration
D(1)T(4)P(14) indicates that there are 1/4/14 dies for DP/TP/PP dimension.
introduced. Compared to the most advanced GPUs [93] with
high-speed rack-scale fabrics (i.e., NVLinks [96]), these WSCs
can provide around6×the inter-chip bandwidth and5×
lower link latency. Our characterization in Fig. 1 reveals that,
under equivalent compute power, the 56-die WSC achieves a
2.62×reduction in effective communication latency compared
with the state-of-the-art (SOTA) 56-GPU NVIDIA GB300
system [95] configured with NVL72. This result highlights
the substantial potential of WSCs for LLM training.
However, unlike traditional ASIC designs [18, 56, 86,
136, 143], chiplet-based architectures [5, 106, 120, 147] or
DGX-class systems [97, 124, 131], WSCs face a unique
architectural challenge: the total physical area available for
compute and memory resources is strictly limited by the
wafer’s size, typically around 40,000 mm 2. This constraint
imposes a fundamental trade-off: Expanding on-wafer memory
capacity necessarily reduces the silicon budget available for
compute resources, and vice versa.
Therefore, enabling efficient LLM training on WSCs
demands tightly coordinated optimization along two fun-
damental levels:(1)Architecture level, where the system
must be tailored to LLM workload characteristics, balancing
compute and memory resources for optimal performance.(2)
Training strategy level, which involves designing optimal
parallelism to align with architectural constraints, efficiently
distributing tasks to fully exploit the WSC’s capabilities.
However, upon re-examining existing works, we identify
that the co-design of training strategies and architectural levels
for LLM training remains largely unexplored. Most existing
research continues to focus on single-level optimizations.
Isolated optimizations on training strategy level. Prior
arXiv:2512.12279v1 [eess.SP] 13 Dec 2025

Training
Strategy level
Architecture
level ..
.
..
.
Architecture
DSE
Training Strategy
DSE
Potential Perf.
Real Perf.
Performance
Analysis
DGX System
Area & IO
Constraints
Step 1
WSC
Step 1 Step 2 Step 3 Step 4 WATOS
Step 2 Step 3 Step 4
WATOS
Co-design
Architecture
Fig. 2. Illustration of the training strategies and architecture co-design.
The GPU system consists of 8 Blackwell Ultra GPUs, providing a total
compute capacity of 40,000 TFLOPS, 2304 GB of HBM, 1.8 TB/s of NVLink
interconnect bandwidth, and 8 TB/s of memory bandwidth. For fairness, the
WSC is configured with equivalent compute power, as detailed in §V-C.
arts [43, 60, 90, 94, 122, 126] have proposed various training
optimizations, such as auto parallelism, mixed precision [32,
85], offloading [168], compression [43], and recomputation
[126], which significantly improve GPU training performance,
as shown in the step 1 of Fig. 2. However, the performance
ceiling is fundamentally constrained by the limited bandwidth
of the board-level interconnect in DGX systems. Achieving
higher performance urgently requires training strategies specif-
ically designed for WSCs.
Isolated optimizations on architecture level. Several stud-
ies [7, 23, 102, 103, 114, 158] have attempted to explore wafer-
level architectures, involving interconnect topologies [158],
interconnect substrates [103], and chiplet design [7]. However,
these works, on one hand, lack the collaborative optimizations
with training strategies, leading to suboptimal performance,
as step 2 in Fig. 2. For example, when applying Megatron’s
parallel setup to train Llama2-30B on a WSC, we observe
a80%performance gap between real and potential perfor-
mance. Therefore, to fully unlock the potential of hardware
resources, it is critical to co-design training strategies with the
architecture. As revealed in step 3&4 of Fig. 2, the absence of
training strategy-architecture synergy results in the inability to
fully leverage the WSC architecture’s potential. On the other
hand, existing WSC designs often fail to thoroughly consider
physical area constraints, thereby preventing the realization of
an optimal wafer architecture design.
However, it is far from trivial to develop a co-design
framework that integrates training strategy and architecture.
It faces three key challenges: 1) The lack of configurable
wafer-scale hardware templates for design space exploration
(DSE). 2) The absence of systematic memory-centric training
optimizations tailored to WSCs. 3) Na ¨ıve greedy co-design
strategies are prone to getting trapped in local optima.
To address these challenges, in this paper, we develop a
physical-constraints aware training strategy and architecture
co-exploration framework, W ATOS, as the step 5 in Fig. 2.
Our contributions are summarized as follows:
1)Targeting WSCs, we design a highly configurable hard-
ware template. Leveraging this template, W ATOS systemat-
ically identifies and exploits latent co-optimization opportu-
nities betweenwafer architectureandtraining strategies.
(b) Architecture of die and compute core
24.79 mm
33.05 mm
HBM
XW=198.32 mm
YW=198.32 mm
S
R
A
M
DMA
NoC
Cont-
roller
Vector Unit
PE array
Wafer-scale chip
HBMHBM
HBMHBMHBM
D2D
DieXM=4.92mm
YM=8.13mm
Compute Core
(a) Architecture of the wafer-scale chip
XC=21.92mm
YC=22.81mm
Fig. 3. Architecture of wafer-scale chips (WSCs).
These opportunities become particularly critical in the post-
Moore era. To the best of our knowledge, this isthe first
workto enable such joint optimization.
2)To efficiently explore the co-design space, W ATOS
integrates the following key innovations:(1)An early-pruning
central scheduler to accelerate the DSE process.(2)A globally
coordinated memory-efficient recomputation (GCMR) strategy
that maximizes memory savings while minimizing pipeline
bubble overhead.(3)A global communication-cost aware
resource placement and allocation strategy to reduce commu-
nication costs.(4)A genetic algorithm (GA)-based optimizer
to accelerate convergence toward the global optimum.
3)Using W ATOS, we uncover several intriguing insights
for the WSC architecture and the LLM training: (1) With
W ATOS’ joint optimization, WSCs with moderate per-die
DRAM capacity can achieve a balanced allocation of compute,
communication, and memory resources, yielding near-optimal
training throughput. (2) With tailored resource allocation and
memory scheduling, smaller TP configurations on WSCs
can realize better training performance than larger ones. (3)
Enabled by our dedicated memory management strategies,
efficient LLM training on WSCs demands not only high
DRAM bandwidth but also ample communication bandwidth,
making their balance crucial for optimal performance.
4)Compared to the SOTA LLM training systems and Cere-
bras wafer training strategy, W ATOS’s co-optimized architec-
ture and training strategies achieve an average performance
gain of2.74×and1.53×, respectively.
II. BACKGROUND
A. Wafer-scale Chip (WSC)
WSCs integrate multiple functional dies using advanced
packaging technologies like TSV [28, 51, 63], CoWoS [41,
44, 159], and RDL [38, 39, 64, 65]. There are two main ap-
proaches to wafer-scale integration: 1) Monolithic integration,
where all compute dies and interconnects are fabricated di-
rectly on a single wafer substrate [6, 31, 73]. 2) Chiplet-based
integration, where compute dies are fabricated separately and
bonded to the wafer-scale interconnect [1, 102, 103, 120].
Given the latter offers greater flexibility, scalability, and yield,

Compute Die
(a) Wafer0: large HBM &
small compute die
(b) Wafer1: moderate HBM
& large compute die
HBM Die
Compute Die
HBM Die
HBM Die
(c) Wafer2:smaller HBM &
large compute die
Compute Die
HBM Die
Pros Cons
Wafer 0
Large storage
Low D2D BW
Low Comp
Pros Cons
Wafer1
Large D2D
Small storage
High Comp
Pros Cons
Wafer 3
Larger D2D
Smaller storage
High Comp
(d) Trade-off among storage, compute power and D2D bandwidth on wafer-scale chips
Fig. 4. Trade-off among storage, compute power and D2D bandwidth on WSC.
as individual dies can be independently optimized and tested
before integration, this paper focuses on the chiplet-based
WSC architecture.
Wafer-level architecture.As illustrated in Fig. 3, the WSC
hardware template is structured into three hierarchies: wafer,
die, and core. At the wafer level, a 2D mesh topology is
deployed on the 198mm×198mm wafer to achieve efficient
communication between adjacent dies, supporting modes in-
cluding Die-to-Die and Die-to-HBM. This topology offers su-
perior bandwidth and signal integrity compared to alternatives,
making it the preferred choice for wafer-scale architectures.
Die & Core architecture.Each die integrates both com-
putation and DRAM resources, unlike conventional chiplet
designs that typically decouple these components [5, 88, 120,
128]. As depicted in Fig. 3, each die consists of multiple
compute cores, a Network-on-Chip (NoC), HBM chiplets
and peripheral D2D interfaces. The NoC adopts a 2D mesh
topology, enabling low-latency communication across cores.
At the core level, each core is managed by a local controller
and communicates via the NoC and DMA engine. It comprises
a shared SRAM, a PE array for GEMM operations, and a
vector unit for scalar computation.
Configurable Hardware Template.Our hardware template
offers a range of adjustable architectural parameters. These
parameters include: 1) at the wafer level, compute die size
(XC,Y C), DRAM die size (X M,Y M ), the number of dies
in horizontal (N X
D , e.g., 8 in Fig. 3), vertical dimensions
(N Y
D , e.g., 6 in Fig. 3) along with DRAM/SRAM capacity,
as well as NoC topologies. At the die level, compute units are
configurable in core array dimensions and the number of MAC
units per PE array. The PE microarchitecture and dataflow are
derived from prior accelerator designs [9, 10, 33, 54, 61, 128,
137, 138, 140, 142, 145, 160].
B. Large Model Distributed Training
There are three primary parallel training methods: data
parallelism (DP) [112, 117, 154], where each die stores the
full model and synchronizes gradients across dataset shards;
tensor parallelism (TP) [16, 122, 146], which partitions tensors
along specific dimensions across dies; and pipeline parallelism
(PP) [21, 45, 89], which splits the model into sequential stages
0
0.5
1
1.5
(16,2) (8,4) (4,8) (2,16) (16,4) (8,8) (4,16) (2,32)
Llama 30B Llama 70B
Computation Communication
(b) NoC utilization in Wafer(a) Iteration time with diverse parallelism (TP,PP)
TP=8,PP=1 TP=4,PP=2
Underutilized link
Mem usage (GB)
MG
optimal MG
optimal
Max DRAM Capacity per die on wafer
Norm. Time
(c) Memory usage for TP=4, PP=8 on WSC
Real optimal
Real
optimal
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
# PP
stage
1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8
# PP
stage0
20
40
60
80
100
Activation weight Gradient Optimizer Underutilization
Ring all-reduce TP comm linkTP comm link
PP comm link
Fig. 5. Current LLM training parallelism framework is unsuitable for WSCs.
0
1
2
3
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
0
1
2
3
4
5
0
1
2
3
4
Normalized Time
Utilization
Normalized Time
Norm. Throughput
(a) Ablation Study for TP and FSDP (b) Ablation Study for Recomp. and Offload
TP FSDP
Llama2 30B
TP FSDP
Llama3 70B
TP FSDP
GPT 175B Llama2 30B Llama3 70B GPT 175B
Comp.
Time
Comm.
Time
D2D BW
Utilization
Comp.
Time
Recomp./
Offload Time ThroughputComp.
Time
Recomp./
Offload Time Throughput
Fig. 6. Ablation Study for (a) FSDP and (b) Offloading. WSC is configured
as §V-A with host-WSC PCIE 160GB/s [127].
executed in order. PP is often implemented using one-forward-
one-backward (1F1B) schedule [21], which effectively reduces
memory consumption compared to traditional PP strategies
[45, 108]. As in Fig. 8 (a), the 1F1B schedule consists of
three phases: warmup, steady and ending. Forpstages andn
micro-batches (p=3,n=5 in Fig. 8 (a)), a die at stagesfirst
performsp−sforward passes during warmup, then alternates
n−p+sforward and backward passes in the steady phase, and
completesp−sbackward passes in the ending phase. However,
1F1B has imbalanced memory usage [126], as dies at the stage
smust retain intermediate activations forp−smicro-batches,
as shown by the number of saved activation blocks in Fig. 8
(a).
Recently, bidirectional PP schedules [17, 72, 77] are pro-
posed. However, these methods intensify memory pressure as
model parameters are duplicated across stages. In addition,
whenn>p, these schedules often incur more pipeline bubbles
than 1F1B. Moreover, DP also suffers from high memory
overhead due to full model replication. Even advanced DP
method like FSDP [166], which shards model states to reduce
memory usage, perform poorly on WSCs due to heavy traffic
of weights, gradients and optimizer states. As Fig. 6 (a) shows,
such traffic congests the 2D-mesh NoC, causing a20%–40%
drop in bandwidth utilization compared to TP, which transmits
activations only.Thus, we focus on coordinating TP and PP
under 1F1B scheduling to scale LLM training on WSCs.
C. LLM Training System
Batching is widely adopted in modern LLM training to
improve computation efficiency and accelerate convergence
[91, 133, 134]. However, large batch sizes lead to excessive
memory occupancy. To address this, training frameworks like
Megatron-LM [122] and DeepSpeed [116] adopt memory
optimization techniques such as mixed precision [4, 53, 85],
offloading [110, 113, 117], and activation recomputation [8,
48, 107]. While effective in conventional systems, some of

Partition level
Wafer archi level
Type 0 Type 1 Type 2
Type 0
Performance
Type 0 Type 1 Type 2
Wafer 0 Wafer 1 Wafer 2Wafer 1 Wafer 2 Wafer 0
Training Strategy & Arch Co-explorationTraditional Design
Potential PerfReal Perf
Type 1 Type 2
L1 L1L1
L2 L2 L2
L3 L3L3
+=
+=
+=
(a) Illustration for diverse checkpoint
choices for Llama7B with TP=2
(b) Diverse checkpoint choices needs
diverse resource demands
(c) Training strategy and architecture co-design brings better performance
Activation Checkpoint
x
x
x
(TP partition)
Higher performance
Fig. 7. Potential of training strategy and architecture co-design in WSCs.
these are ill-suited for WSCs. For example, compared to the
immense computation capability and on-chip bandwidth of
WSCs, limited bandwidth between host and WSC leads to
severe computation stalls, making offloading impractical in
wafer scenarios. In contrast,activation recomputation is
more well-suited to WSCs, as it reduces memory usage
without external data transfer. As shown in Fig. 6 (b),
compared with recomputation, offloading incurs substantially
higher overhead, resulting in an average 2.2×increase in wall-
time latency. Despite the advantage, the recomputation alters
the memory-to-compute ratio, reshaping hardware resource
demands. This calls for a co-design of training strategies
and wafer architecture, an aspect that remains unexplored in
existing works.
III. MOTIVATION
A. Problems in LLM Training on WSCs
While existing training systems have recognized the
resource-intensive characteristic of LLM training and adopted
hybrid parallelism to address it, several key problems remain:
First, existing systems often fail to achieve optimal
parallelism on WSCs due to a lack of consideration for the
underlying interconnect topology.To demonstrate this, we
conducted experiments using Llama-30B/70B models across
32 and 64 dies on a WSC. The compute die configuration
is detailed in §V-B. Based on the model configurations, we
derived the optimal parallelism settings recommended by the
Megatron framework [94] (MG-optimal), which suggests (TP,
PP) = (8, 4) for 32 dies and (8, 8) for 64 dies. We then
deployed these settings on the WSC to evaluate actual perfor-
mance. As shown in Fig. 5 (a), on the WSC, configurations
of (4, 8) for 32 dies and (4, 16) for 64 dies outperform the
MG-optimal settings. This discrepancy arises from Megatron’s
ignorance of the WSC’s 2D mesh interconnect. As depicted in
Fig. 5 (b), naively setting TP = 8 leads to link under-utilization
during Ring All-Reduce, affecting communication efficiency.
In contrast, TP=4 with PP=2 achieves more balanced link
utilization and better overall performance.
Latency
Reduced
latency
0
0.5
1
1.5
w/o. Naive
(c) Diverse recomp. memory utilization
OOM Error
Underutilized
Norm. memory utilization
Stage 0Stage 0 Stage 1Stage 1 Stage 2Stage 2
GCMR
0
0
0
1 2
1
1
2
3
2
3
4
3
4
4
(a) Naive recomputation with imbalane bubble
FP BP Recomp. in BP Imbalance Bubble
00
00
00 11 22
11
11
33 44
44
44
33
33
22
22
Stage 0
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 0
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 0
Stage 1
Stage 2
Stage 0
Stage 1
Stage 2
0
0
0
1
1 2
1
2
2
3
3
4
3
4
4
0
0
0
1
1 2
1
2
2
3
3
4
3
4
4
(b) Globally coordinated memory-efficient recomputation (GCMR)
Fig. 8. Illustration of the imbalance bubble caused by naive recomputation
and its underutilized memory.
Second, imbalanced memory usage incurred by large
PP leads to underutilized DRAM resources on WSCs.Fig.
5 (c) shows peak DRAM usage during Llama-30B training
with TP=4 and PP=8 on a WSC, where each die is equipped
with 96 GB of DRAM (detailed in §V-B). The results reveal
pronounced disparities in average DRAM utilization among
dies on the WSC. Dies at the early stages of the pipeline
exhibit much higher memory pressure than those at the tail.
This skew is caused by checkpointed intermediate activations,
which account for over70%of total memory usage.
B. Trade-off among Compute-Memory-Comm on WSCs
LLM training imposes substantial demands on compute,
memory, and communication resources. WSCs enable large-
scale integration for diverse function dies, but remain con-
strained by the physical wafer size, which provide around
40,000 mm 2 of usable area on a 12-inch wafer.This ar-
chitecture feature highlights a trade-off among on-wafer
compute, memory, and interconnect resources.
Figs. 4 (a–c) depicts three WSC configurations with varying
DRAM chiplet counts.Wafer 0places six DRAM chiplets on
both sides of the compute die, maximizing memory capacity
for storing large models and checkpoints.Wafer 1reduces
DRAM to three chiplets on one side, reallocating area to
enlarge the compute die and improve both compute capability
and D2D bandwidth.Wafer 2retains the Wafer 1’s compute-
die size but further reduces DRAM, freeing more peripheral
IO to enhance D2D bandwidth. Fig. 4 (d) summarizes the
inherent architecture trade-off.(1)Increasing DRAM capacity
reduces space available for compute dies, in turn lowering
compute density.(2)Given the fixed number of compute-die
interconnect interfaces, allocating more interfaces to DRAM
reduces the bandwidth available for D2D links.
C. Untapped Potential of Training Strategy&WSC Co-design
Fig. 7 (a) illustrates three checkpoint (i.e., recomputation)
strategies (Type 0-2) applied to a computation graph with three
operators (L1-L3) with TP=2, where each operator represents
the corresponding operation across all layers. Type 0 stores
all activation checkpoints without recomputation. Type 1 re-
computes outputs of operator L2, while Type 2 recomputes
L1’s output. Due to operator-specific tensor partitioning, each
strategy incurs distinct compute, storage, and communication
demands. As depicted in Fig. 7 (b), Type 0 has the highest
storage cost but minimal computation overhead, as it avoids
recomputation entirely. In contrast, Type 1 and Type 2 incur

higher compute overheads, but differ in storage and commu-
nication footprints based on which activations are recomputed.
These distinct training strategies impose specific demands
for on-wafer resource allocation, underscoring the co-design of
training strategies and architecture. As depicted in Fig. 7(c),
traditional designs often focus solely on strategy-level opti-
mizations, while neglecting architectural adaptation, leading to
sub-optimal real performance. By contrast, co-design leverages
dominant tensor partitioning and recomputation patterns to
proactively tailor wafer architectures to the needs of typical
training workloads, seeking enhanced overall performance.
Unfortunately, existing DSE frameworks almost fail to
leverage the co-optimization of training strategies and architec-
ture, let alone account for wafer-level architectural constraints.
Table I summarizes their features. Timeloop [105] focuses on
die-level mapping exploration and architecture optimization,
while Hecaton [46] and Gemini extend to the chiplet scale.
DFModel [59], Calculon [47] and Bpipe [57] explore optimal
training strategy or scheduling on GPU clusters, but none
of these works consider the unique constraints of WSCs.
Recent works like WSC-LLM [156] and PD [158] realize
WSC constraints, but one focuses on inference and the other
on topology optimization, lacking a comprehensive training
strategy. They overlook custom training optimizations for
recomputation and checkpoint overheads, which motivates the
development of W ATOS.
IV. WATOS FRAMEWORK
As depicted in the left of Fig. 9, W ATOS takes architec-
ture parameter candidates, LLM model configs, and train-
ing datasets as inputs. Considering wafer area constraints,
architecture parameter candidates are derived from arbitrary
combinations of configurable parameters (as in §II-A). All
architectural candidates are first exhaustively explored in an
Enumerator, then sent to theCo-exploration Engineto de-
termine the achievable optimal LLM training performance on
WSCs.
Overall workflow. As shown in the right part of Fig. 9,
the central scheduler first iterates through feasible TP and
PP sizes, and preliminarily allocates resources across pipeline
stages. Then, the recomputation scheduler prevents memory
overflow by selectively recomputing activations with minimal
latency overhead. Next, the memory scheduler optimizes on-
wafer memory usage by topology-aware resource placement
and fine-grained DRAM allocation. Further, the global op-
timizer applies genetic algorithms to search the remaining
design space and identify optimal configurations. Finally, the
execution engines generate detailed implementation plans,
invoke theEvaluatorto assess performance, and return results
to the central scheduler for the next exploration round.
A. Central Scheduler
Given the trade-off between memory, computation, and
communication on WSCs, we prioritize model parallelism
within a single wafer, requiring careful TP and PP partitioning.
This presents two challenges: determining the optimal TP/PP
TABLE I
SUMMARY OFFRAMEWORKS(CO-DE: CO-DESIGN, OPT: OPTIMIZATION)
Framework HW Optimization Recomp WSC WSC Opt
Comp Mem D2D aware Physical Co-de level
Timeloop[105] × × × × × die
Hecaton[46] × × × chiplet
Gemini[5] × × × chiplet
DFModel[59] × × × × × cluster
Calculon[47] × × × cluster
BPipe[57] × × × cluster
FRED[114] × × × wafer
PD[158] × × wafer
WSC-LLM[156] Low × × × wafer
W ATOS " " " " " " wafer
ratio while considering architectural constraints, and manag-
ing activation checkpoints to prevent out-of-memory (OOM)
errors
To this end, we propose Alg. 1, which systematically opti-
mizes resource partitioning for TP and PP. Our optimization is
based on the premise that training data consists of four parts:
model weights, gradients, optimizer states, and activation
checkpoints. The first three, collectively referred to asmodelP,
are essential and must be retained throughout the training
process, while activation checkpoints are optional and can
be regenerated through recomputation. Thus, minimal model-
parallel units must fitmodelPin their aggregate memory.
Given a modelM, model-parallel diesMP, per-die DRAM
capacityC, workloadW, the central scheduler first checks if
modelPfits within the max aggregate memory capacity of the
MP. If not, it will directly prune the parallelism candidate
(line 1, 2). It then iterates over all feasible TP and PP
sizes, for eachmpwithin theMP(line 4), ensuring the TP
instance consists of an even number of dies to meet the 2D-
mesh topology communication requirements. Once the TP and
PP are determined, the algorithm checks if the checkpoint
storage requirement is met (line 5). For failed configurations,
it delegates them to downstream schedulers, which employ
recomputation and memory allocation to ensure compliance
(line 6). Finally, the algorithm enumerates all possible TP
partition strategies (line 7, detailed in §IV-E) to identify the
max achievable throughput for each configuration, updating
the current configuration if a better record is found (line 8).
B. Recomputation Scheduler
In §IV-A, we obtain the parallel configuration (TP Config,
PP Config) that can accommodate themodelpwith partial ac-
tivation checkpoints. The remaining checkpoints exceeding on-
wafer memory capacity can result in OOM errors that interrupt
the training process. To address this limitation, recomputing
these checkpoints enables training to proceed within the given
memory constraints. However, as shown in Fig. 8 (b)(c),
the naive recomputation strategy not only introduces pipeline
bubbles but also underutilizes memory, thereby incurring addi-
tional computation overhead and degraded training throughput.
To this end, we propose a globally coordinated memory-
efficient recomputation (GCMR) strategy, as outlined in Alg.

Central Scheduler (IV-A)
modelp/MP < C ?
Early Pruner
modelp/MP < C ?
Early Pruner
Parallelism Generator
Generate TP&PP config.
Parallelism Generator
Generate TP&PP config.
Optimizing JudgerOptimizing Judger
How to host the model on wafer? What if memory
on wafer is
not enough? How to better
utilize remaining
memory?
What if the
strategy is local
optimal?
EvaluatorDRAM AccessComp cost NoC & D2D Comm
How to
implement
it on wafer?
WW
Input
Output Best WSC
Arch
Mapping
Scheme
Performance
Reports
Co-Exploration Engine
WATOS
Framework Analysis ToolsExploration
Records
DatasetLLM
Models
Arch Params
Candidates
Enumerator
Recomputation
Scheduler
(IV-B)
Memory Scheduler :
Placement
(IV-C-1)
Memory Scheduler :
Allocation
(IV-C-2)
Genetic Algrithm
based Optimizer
(IV-D)
(modelp+checkpoints)/mp<C?
Intra-stage Inter-stages
Comp, Comm volumnCost
Next
Iteration
Recomp. Config.
What if memory
in stage is not
enough?
Mem_pairFine-grained
memory allocation
Heuristic Search
PP Engine
(IV-E-2)
PP Engine
(IV-E-2)
TP Engine
(IV-E-1)
TP Engine
(IV-E-1)
TP&PP
Config.
Training
Strategy
Fig. 9. The proposed W ATOS framework for LLM training and wafer-scale architecture co-exploration.
(a) Computation Units for Transformer Block
Tensor size (MB)
Recomp time (ms)
Tensor Name X1 Q K V X2 X3 X4
1073 125 1251073 1073 1073 1073
…
…
28 3.5 3.50.9 0.21 27 0.9 …
Norm.
X3
X4
GeMM
X5
GeMM
X7
Activation
X6
Operator Activation
checkpoint
(c) Operator recomputation overhead of Llama-65B on one die of wafer config2
Normalization
X0
X1
GeMM
K
GeMM
V
GeMM
Q
Flash Attention
X2
GeMM
X3
(b) Accuracy of proposed DNN model
X5
4624
4.1
200 400 600 800 1000 1200
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Measured Memory (MB)
Predicted
Memory (MB)
DNN err: 1.6%
Analytical err: 14.5%
200 400 600 800 1000 1200
200
400
600
800
1000
1200
Measured Memory (MB)
Predicted
Memory (MB)
DNN err: 1.6%
Analytical err: 14.5%
Low
Accuracy
Measured Time (ms)
Predicted Time
(ms)
5 10 15 20 25 300
0
10
20
30 DNN err: 2.3%
Analytical err: 19.6%
DNN err: 2.3%
Analytical err: 19.6%
Measured Time (ms)
Predicted Time
(ms)
5 10 15 20 25 300
0
10
20
30 DNN err: 2.3%
Analytical err: 19.6%
High
Accuracy
Measured Time (ms)
Predicted Time
(ms)
5 10 15 20 25 300
0
10
20
30 DNN err: 2.3%
Analytical err: 19.6%
High
Accuracy
Fig. 10. Recomputation preparation for LLM models.
2. In contrast to the naive recomputation strategy depicted in
Fig. 8 (a), the GCMR strategy takes into account the DRAM
capacity across the entire WSC. It employs a global balanced
recomputation strategy that minimizes the bubble while max-
imizing memory utilization, as demonstrated in Fig. 8 (b).
Notably, the memory imbalance introduced by 1F1B pipeline
may still lead to checkpoint overflows in early stages, like the
stage0 and stage1 in Fig. 8 (c). Therefore, after generating
the recomputation configurationRecomp config, the GCMR
identifies stages that are susceptible to such imbalance as
Senders and those with sufficient memory as Helpers. The
Helpers can receive the overflowingcheckpointsfrom the
Senders, thus balancing memory usage across the pipeline.
Given that most LLMs are based on the Transformer
architecture, we begin with decomposing the computation
into a set of fundamental operator units according to the
Transformer graph, as shown in Fig. 10 (a). Each operator is
annotated with its computation type as well as the associated
checkpoint requirements, enabling fine-grained recomputation
scheduling. We further incorporate the SOTA FlashAttention
[13] mechanism as a specialized operator to capture its distinct
performance and memory characteristics. To cover all possible
setups, we train a DNN model to predict the execution
latency and memory footprint of each operator, based on two
key considerations:1)Despite their precision, cycle-accurate
Algorithm 1:Early Pruning-based Central Scheduler
Input:ModelM, die limit for MPMP, Die memory
capacityC, WorkloadW, TP split strategyS
Output:OptimalConfig
1ifW.modelP/MP >Cthen
2Prune(Candidate);
3else
4fortp·pp==mp∈[1,MP]do
5if(W.modelP+W.checkpoints)/mp>Cthen
6DownstreamSchedulers(tp, pp)
7fors∈Sdo
8OptimalConfig←argmax(test(W,tp,pp,s))
simulators often require minutes to hours per run, making
them impractical for large-scale performance evaluation.2)
Analytical models, on the other hand, fail to capture complex
factors such as alignment overheads and multi-level memory
effects, resulting in limited prediction accuracy. As depicted
in Fig. 10 (b), DNN-based prediction can realize up to17.3%
higher accuracy over the analytical scheme.3)Numerous
simulator works have validated the feasibility of using DNNs,
with prediction error remaining within a controllable range
[58, 104, 156]. Therefore, we adopt a DNN model to predict
the execution latency and memory footprint of each operator
under different batch sizes and wafer-scale hardware configu-
rations. The collective communication overhead of recomputed
tensors between adjacent operators is estimated through the
α–βmodel [130] as Eq. (1), whereαrepresents link latency
andβdenotes the communication size of All-Reduce. This
profiling is conducted offline and produces an operator-level
performance lookup table for iterative process, as depicted in
Fig. 10 (c).
tcomm =α+β/BW, β= 2·(TP−1)/TP·BSH(1)
Based on the computation and memory characteristics of
fundamental LLM operators, GCMR performs dynamic pro-
gramming to accelerate the search for the optimal recomputa-
tion strategy. It begins from the last pipeline stage, incremen-
tally allocating memory and querying the profile for latency

Algorithm 2:The Proposed GCMR Strategy
Input:TP Config, PP Config, WorkloadW
Output:RecompConfigR, SenderSetS, HelperSetH
1P←RecompProfiling(pp, tp, W);
2fort=pp−1 : 0do
3form= 0 : (pp−t)∗Cdo
4t max←max(T[t+ 1,m−m t],B t + 2Ft−P(m t));
5T[t,m]←min
mt
(tmax),Mem[t,m]←argmin
mt
(tmax);
6fort= 0 :pp−1do
7M[t]←Mem[t,pp·C− Pt−1
i=0M[i]],R[t]←P(M[t]);
8ifM[t]>Cthen
9S.append(stage t);
10else
11H.append(stage t);
12S,H←DescendSort(S,H);
13whileH̸=∅do
14Mem pair(S.pop(),H.pop());
and recomputation candidates, recursively incorporates preced-
ing stages. After analyzing all stages, the algorithm identifies
the optimal configuration by minimizing the maximum stage-
execution time (line 2–5). Finally, the recomputation config-
urations along with memory footprints for each stage are
generated (line 6-8). In this way, the GCMR achieves maximal
global memory efficiency at minimal recomputation cost.
Moreover, lines 9–11 identify Senders and Helpers by
examining the post-recompute memory footprint of each stage.
Specifically, stages exceeding per-die memory capacity are
marked asSenderforcheckpointsoffloading (lines 8,9), while
others serve asHelperto receive the checkpoints (line 10,11).
The algorithm then sorts the Sender and Helper sets by mem-
ory pressure and available memory (line 12) and invokes the
Mem pair procedure to pair memory-constrained Senders with
memory-rich Helpers (lines 13,14). This pairing offloads the
activation checkpoint from high-pressure stages to memory-
rich stages, effectively balancing memory usage across the
pipeline.Notably, the offloading occurs across dies on a
wafer, rather than off-wafer to external memory.
C. Memory Scheduler
1. Optimal Resource Placement Strategy. In § IV-B, we
investigate the memory-efficient recomputation configurations,
along with the construction of the Mem pair set. This pairing
enables offloading checkpoints from the Sender to the DRAM
chiplets of the Helper. However, due to characteristics of the
2D-mesh topology on wafer-scale chips, it is also necessary
to determine the optimal placement of each instance.
Fig. 11 illustrates two resource placement strategies for
an 8 stage pipeline with designated Mem pair configurations
(S1,S8)and(S2,S7). The pipeline stages are arranged
linearly from S1 to S8, with activation checkpoint balance
paths identified between the corresponding Mem pairs. As
can be seen, the conventional left-to-right, upper-to-bottom
resource placement strategy results in long communication
paths between Mem pair stages, with an average of 6 hops.
S1 S2 S3 S4 S5 S6 S7 S8
8-stage Pipeline with Mem_pair (S1,S8), (S2,S7)
S1 S2
S7S8
S1
S2
S4
S3
S5
S6
S7
S8
6 hops, γ=1
4 hops, γ=0
Pipeline Path Activation Balance Path
4 hops, γ=0
Routing Conflicts
6 hops, γ=2S3
S6
S4
S5
(a) Traditional left-to-right, upper-
to-bottom placement strategy
(b) Proposed spatial location-aware
placement strategy
Fig. 11. Comparisons of different resource placement strategies.
In contrast, our proposed spatial location-aware placement ap-
proach strategically co-locates Mem pair stages, significantly
reducing the communication cost by shortening the path length
from 6 hops to 4 hops. Moreover, when considering the overall
communication hops, including those along the pipeline path,
our strategy achieves a 30% reduction in total hop count.
Since the activation checkpoint transfer occurs from Sender
instances to Helper instances, our objective is to minimize the
total distance between each Sender instance and its Helper in-
stance, while avoiding overlapping transmission paths with the
pipeline paths. To achieve this, we adopt a globally location-
aware placement strategy that preserves the critical path of the
pipeline, while minimizing the transmission distance between
Mem pair stages. If multiple placement schemes exist, we
select the one that minimizes the total communication cost.
The selection is formalized as Eq. (2),
GlobalCost=min
P P−1X
i=0
Dist(Si,S i+1)·Comm P P (Si,S i+1)
+
X
(s,h)∈M em pairs
Dist(Ss,S h)·Comm pair(Ss,S h)·(1 +γ)),
(2)
whereS i denotes the center position of the pipeline stage,
i∈[0,PP−1].Comm P P andComm pair represent the
pipeline and checkpoint transfer communication workload
respectively, which are used as weights for distance.Dist
refers to the shortest path between the two pipeline stages.
In cases where multiple shortest paths exist, all such paths
are enumerated. To take routing conflicts into account of
placement, the conflict factorγis introduced, which stands
for the number of conflict links between activation balance
paths and existing pipeline paths. Paths with conflicts will be
punished by1 +γinGlobalCost.
2. Location-aware DRAM capacity allocation. WSCs fea-
ture high D2D bandwidth, typically exceeding DRAM access
bandwidth. This means that, cross-die DRAM read and write
operations are limited by DRAM bandwidth rather than D2D
bandwidth. Leveraging this advantage of the wafer-scale archi-
tecture, the extensive inter-die transfer of checkpoints can be
overlapped by its DRAM access, allowing us to fully utilize

Algorithm 3:Location-aware DRAM Allocation Strategy
Input:Sender setS, Helper setH
Output:Memory pair setA={A 1,..,A k}
1forS i∈Sdo
2Q←sort(GlobalCost(S i,H));
3A i←∅;
4whileS i.OverflowMemory >0do
5d ′←Q.pop();A i.append(d′);
6ifd ′.capacity >Si.OverflowMemorythen
7d ′.capacity−=S i.OverflowMemory;
8Q.insert(d ′);
9else
10S i.OverflowMemory−=d ′.capacity;
all DRAM resources on the wafer for the activation checkpoint
storage, to achieve higher performance of LLM training.
As depicted in Alg. 3, we implement an location-aware
DRAM allocation strategy for handling overflow checkpoints,
to minimize the additional D2D transmission overhead. Given
the Sender setS, the Helper setH, the algorithm finds the
optimal DRAM destination for each Sender’s checkpoint. The
algorithm first identifies the associated Helpers for each Sender
without additional communication cost to form a priority
queueQ, based on the existence of short transmission paths
between their respective positions (line 2). For example, in
Fig.10 (b), DRAMs within S2, S8 and S7 occupy top positions
in the queueQofS 1. Subsequently, an empty Mem pairA i
is initialized (line 3), and the algorithm iteratively allocates
DRAM resources to the SenderS i. The capacity of DRAMs of
Helper is reduced by the portion utilized during the allocation
process (line 5-7). After calculating the remaining capacity, the
DRAM unit is reinserted into the queue Q (line 7-9), which
is dynamically reprioritized to guide subsequent allocations.
The allocation loop continues until the entire checkpoint
requirement ofS i is met. Notably, the Alg. 3 does not conflict
with the optimization in IV-C-1, but rather builds upon it to
execute a fine-grained DRAM allocation strategy.
D. Global Optimizer
§IV-B and §IV-C present the optimal recomputation config-
uration and DRAM allocation strategy, respectively. However,
maximizing memory utilization alone cannot guarantee full
overlap of recomputation bubbles. The greedy strategy may
fail to pair each Sender with the lowest-cost Helper, leading
to local optima, as blue path in Fig. 12. To overcome this
limitation, we employ a genetic algorithm (GA) [35], which
can identify global optima within vast solution spaces based
on evolutionary principles [119].
By integrating GA with customized operators, W ATOS
can thoroughly explore the design space toward near-optimal
solutions. Specifically, given Recomp configR, Mem pair
Aand placement strategy, we develop five GA operators to
facilitate the exploration process, as Op1-Op5 in Fig. 12:
Op1Rvariation: Randomly enable or disable recomputa-
tion for an operator while satisfying DRAM capacity.
R R
Op1 Op2
Op4
Memory Aware Recomp. Strategy
High Throughput
Low Mem utilization
High Throughput
Low Mem utilization
Optimal
Throughput
R
Medium Throughput
High Mem utilization
Medium Throughput
High Mem utilization
Op3
Sub-optimal
Throughput
Op5
Low Throughput
Medium Mem utilization
Location-aware DRAM Capacity Allocation
Mapping on Wafer-scale Chip
Operator w/ Recomp.R Operator w/o recomp. Sender->Helper
R R
Fig. 12. Overview of genetic algorithm-based global optimizer.
Op2Rcrossover: Swap recomputation configurations be-
tween two randomly selected pipeline stages beyond a chosen
backward operator.
Op3 Placement variation: Swap the physical positions of
two randomly chosen stages on the wafer-scale chip.
Op4Avariation: Modify the Mem pair of a Sender by
adding the lowest-cost Helper or removing part of a randomly
selected Helper, while fulfilling the storage constraints.
Op5Acrossover: Exchange Mem pairs between two
randomly selected Senders.
With these operators, mutations and crossover are intro-
duced to generate new configurations. Then, a fitness function,
defined ast max×GlobalCost, evaluates performance, and
configurations are probabilistically eliminated to keep the
search tractable. Crucially, these operators enable any feasible
configuration to evolve into another through valid transfor-
mations. For instance, as depicted in Fig. 12, Op1 can intro-
duce additional recomputation into the initial recomp config,
improving pipeline overlap at the expense of minor DRAM
utilization. Then Op4 adjust Mem pairs obtained from the
greedy strategy, sacrificing the local optimum to reach global
optima as red path in Fig. 12. Therefore, the Global Optimizer
ensures that any point within the design space of WSC can be
reached from any other point, thereby guaranteeing compre-
hensive exploration and yielding global optimal solutions.
E. TP & PP Execution Engines
To efficiently execute LLM operators on wafers, workloads
must be partitioned and mapped across dies and cores. As
shown in Fig. 13, a GEMM operator can be partitioned along
four dimensions: batch size (B), sequence length (S), hidden
size (H), and the reduction dimension (K). W ATOS employs a
two-level allocation strategy: Intra-stage allocation (§IV-E-1)
and Inter-stage allocation (§IV-E-2).
1. TP Engine.Initially, the TP engine decomposes com-
putation into die-level sub-computation tasks. Once receiv-
ing a sub-computation task, each die partitions it into basic
computation tiles (e.g., along B, S, H, K) sized to fit within

Pipeline comm
Balancing comm
(2) Identify comm tasks:
L1
L2 L2
L3(x2)
L3
L4 L1
L4
Inter-stages shortest paths
(3) Identify shortest paths
L1
L1
L2
L2
L1
L1
L2
L2
L4
L4
L3
L3
L4
L4
L3
L3
Intra ring gather/broadcast
BnB
S
H
K
Core
O1
B1
I21
I22
I23
I24 Activation Flow
Weight Flow
L1 L2 L3 L4
(4) Assign tasks to paths
W21W22 W23W24
(1) Intra-die allocation:
Fig. 13. Overview of TP&PP execution engine.
S
K
H
m
n
Repeated Load
Input Tile [m, n]
S
K
H
Repeated Store
Input Stationary (IS)
Dataflow
EMA = SHK(K-1+m-1+n-1)
Weight Stationary (WS)
Dataflow
EMA = SHK(n-1+S-1+m-1)
Output Stationary (OS)
Dataflow
EMA = SHK(n-1+m-1+H-1)
m
n
W Tile [m, n]
m
n
Repeated Load
Output Tile [m, n]Repeated
Store
Repeated
Load
Repeated
Load
Fig. 14. Hybrid dataflows and EMA analysis using anm×nMAC array.
a single core’s SRAM. These tiles are then mapped and
executed. As depicted in Fig. 13 (1), the TP Engine first
partitions along the K dimension and assigns the sub-task
to a die, which further partitions along S and H. Tiles are
then mapped following an output-stationary (OS) dataflow and
executed iteratively. However, OS may not fully maximize
SRAM reuse, increasing system overhead. To address this,
we further incorporate three additional dataflows: weight-
stationary (WS), input-stationary (IS), and row-stationary (RS)
[10]. Among them, RS is specifically designed for convolution
operators. Apart from RS, the variations of OS, WS, and IS do
not change the computational workload but alter the external
memory access (EMA), as illustrated in Fig. 14, leading to
differences in latency and energy consumption. Consequently,
our intra-die dataflow adopts a hybrid design that dynamically
selects the most suitable dataflow based on the operator type
and EMA characteristics under different workloads. Upon
completion of the computation, we implement all-gather and
all-reduce operations in the TP process using the bidirectional
ring algorithm [170], which aligns well with the 2D-mesh
topology of WSCs. The TP engine can also be configured
to explore other intra-stage communication mechanisms such
as Multitree [42]. Overall, the TP engine provides a robust
approach to dynamically optimize intra-stage computation and
communication, guaranteeing an efficient training process.
2. PP Engine.Inter-stage communication is the major bot-
tleneck in chiplet-based WSCs [120]. To mitigate contention
from many-to-many communication, we adopt the following
strategy for inter-stage communication, as shown in Fig. 13:
Firstly, all inter-stage communication tasks, including pipeline
data transfer between adjacent stages and activation balancing
TABLE II
PARAMETERS OF FOURREPRESENTATIVEHARDWARECONFIGURATIONS
Config. Type Config 1 Config 2 Config 3 Config 4
#Die num 64 56 56 48
#Die in X,Y-dim (8, 8) (7, 8) (7, 8) (6, 8)
Comp Power 512 708 708 708
DRAM Bandwidth 1TB/s 1.5TB/s 2TB/s 2.5TB/s
DRAM per die 48GB 64GB 70GB 96GB
D2D Bandwidth 4.5TB/s 4.5TB/s 4TB/s 3.5TB/s
between senders and helpers, are identified. The shortest paths
between corresponding stages are then determined. Subse-
quently, we allocate these communication tasks to links in
order of size. In the allocation process, we prioritize unused
links by giving a punishment factor to occupied links, and
consequently avoid contention. As shown in Fig. 13, pipeline
and activation balancing communications are overlapped as
they occupy different links. Once the inter-stage communica-
tion cost determined, we can derive the execution time for a
pipeline iteration based on the TP engine’s execution strategy.
F . Evaluator
The evaluator of the W ATOS framework is built upon Astra-
sim [152], an efficient and widely adopted simulator to model
distributed parallel execution. OurExecution Enginesserves
as the interface for global performance evaluation. To realize
this, we introduce two significant efforts on Astra-sim.
First, we extend ASTRA-sim by integrating detailed mod-
eling of memory usage, computation, and communication
overheads for key LLM operators. Additionally, we incor-
porate a DRAM chiplet capacity model to capture the on-
die memory constraints. These enhancements enable memory-
aware scheduling simulations, allowing Astra-sim to more
accurately reflect the resource consumption on WSCs.
Secondly, to enable rapid simulations, we pre-build a
mapping lookup table offline by profiling optimal intra-die
mapping strategies for representative configurations, including
different models, sequence lengths, and batch sizes. For each
case, we log key metrics such as latency, DRAM access
volume, and communication overhead. During W ATOS’s on-
line execution, the table is accessed in a read-only manner
with negligible overhead. The feasibility of this approach
is supported by numerous works [49], showing the error of
precomputed results remains within an acceptable range.
V. EVALUATION
A. Experiment Setup
Basic Hardware Configurations. To support wafer-scale
architecture exploration, we configure the compute die param-
eters based on the setup illustrated in Fig. 3. The compute
die have two configurations: (1) 21.92mm × 22.81mm with a
16×16 array of Dojo-style cores, and (2) 25.5mm × 25.2mm
with an 18×18 core array. They are manufactured using
TSMC’s 7 nm process technology and operates at a frequency
of 2 GHz [127]. The edge of the compute die provides a total
interconnect bandwidth of 12 TB/s across four directions. Each

core delivers a computational power of 2.04 FP16 TFLOPS
and features 1.25 MB of SRAM.
Architectural DSE. In this study, we perform an archi-
tectural DSE of WSCs based on the compute chips. Each
chip can integrate a varying number of DRAM chiplets,
enabling different trade-offs in compute capability, memory
capacity, and bandwidth. This exploration aims to demonstrate
the advantages of W ATOS and to provide deeper insights
into the resource trade-offs on WSCs. Table II summarizes
four representative wafer-scale configurations generated by the
proposed enumerator, which serve as the basis for our DSE.
DSE Configurations. We evaluate W ATOS on Intel Xeon
Gold 6448H with 32 cores per socket. The runtime of the
global optimizer is 0.274s for 100 exploration steps. Beyond
runtime, we observe that the selection strategy inherently
introduces a trade-off between exploration steps and final
performance: 1) The elitist strategy selects only the fittest
individuals, leading to fast convergence but often suboptimal
performance. 2) Binary tournament selection preserves greater
diversity, enabling better performance at the cost of slower
convergence. We introduceωas an interface to control the pro-
portion of elitism. Fig. 24 (b) illustrates the impact of varying
ωon both the convergence speed and the final performance.
Workloads. We choose a series of models from 30B to
671B for our experiments, including dense models Llama2-
30B [134], Llama3-70B [83], GPT-175B [3] and MoE models
Gshard-137B [66] and Deepseek-v3 [17]. We adopt mixed
precision training, with FP16 for weights and activations, and
FP32 for Adam optimizers.
Metrics. To evaluate system performance, we adopt iteration
time and throughput as metrics. Iteration time measures the
latency of one forward and backward pass, while throughput
denotes floating-point operations per second. All results are
normalized to the lowest-performing configuration (value = 1).
As recomputation may increase throughput without improving
performance due to additional computation, we break down
throughput results for all configurations using recomputation.
B. Architectural Design Space Exploration
As recomputation is critical in improving memory effi-
ciency during training, a viable WSC must perform robustly
under both recomputation and non-recomputation scenarios.
Fig.15 shows results of four feasible WSC architectures across
representative LLM models, covering variations in sequence
length and batch size for generalizable evaluation. Config
3 consistently achieves the best performance, demonstrating
adaptability to diverse models and workloads, and emerging
as the universal optimal WSC. These results suggest that
a WSC with moderate per-die DRAM capacity and high
compute density can effectively balance compute, memory,
and communication demand during LLM training. In contrast,
architectures with excessively large or small per-die DRAM
suffer from imbalanced utilization and degraded performance.
The comparison between Config 2 and Config 4 shows
that Config 4 performs better without recomputation, whereas
Config 2 excels when recomputation is enabled. This shift
(a) Training performance of diverse architectures without recomputation
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
1.6
Norm. ThroughputNorm. Throughput0
0.6
1.2
1.8Throughput Recomp Throughtput Time Analytic*
Analytic*Throughput Time
0
0.5
1
Normalized TimeNormalized Time0
0.5
1
1.5
1.5
(b) Training performance of diverse architectures with recomputation
LLama2 30B Llama3 70B Gshard-137B GPT-175B GPT-175B
C1 C2 C3 C4
*Analytic model: Time = max( ) + ,Ccomp + Crecomp
Comp. Power
C access
BWDRAM, Crecomp = (MemRequire - DRAMAggr) × ηCcomm
BWD2D
C1 C2 C3 C4C1 C2 C3 C4 C1 C2 C3 C4 C1 C2 C3 C4
Fig. 15. Performance comparison for configs 1-4 on Llama2 30B, Llama3-
70B, Gshard-137B, GPT-175B (a) w/o recomputation (b) w/ recomputation.
Analytic model for DSE optimum only; idealized results not comparable.
stems from recomputation increasing compute demand while
reducing DRAM requirements. As a result, Config 2’s higher
compute density becomes beneficial under recomputation,
but leads to performance degradation in non-recomputation
scenarios.This observation underscores that compute density,
along with DRAM bandwidth and capacity, are key determi-
nants of performance in LLM training workloads.
We further apply a first-order analytic model to GPT-175B,
as depicted in Fig. 15, where C comp, C recomp, C access and
Ccomm denotes the computation load, recomputation load,
DRAM access and communication load, respectively.ηrepre-
sents the computation load associated with each byte of data.
As can be seen, this model fails to capture the aforementioned
insights and consistently favors configs with the largest DRAM
capacity. This is essentially because the knapsack-like problem
solved by W ATOS is NP-hard and typically requires either
complex multi-dimensional dynamic programming [78, 81]
or heuristic algorithms [12, 34, 75]. This again confirms the
necessity of using W ATOS for exploring wafer-scale architec-
tures under realistic training conditions.
C. Overall Performance
We compare the optimal WSC configuration (Config 3) with
the Megatron-LM [122], a SOTA GPU-based LLM training
system, referred to as MG-GPU. To ensure a fair comparison,
the Megatron setup consists of 8×Blackwell Ultra 288GB
GPUs, connected via 1.8 TB/s intra-node bandwidth. In terms
of compute resources, MG-GPU offers a total of 40,000
TFLOPS, slightly exceeding the 39,648 TFLOPS provided by
the WSC. To ensure fairness, MG-GPU’s DRAM is scaled
from 2304 GB to 3920 GB to match the WSC, while both
systems maintain equal DRAM bandwidth of 2 TB/s. Also,
we directly apply Megatron’s scheduling strategy and Cerebras
weight streaming strategy to the WSC, denoted as MG-wafer
and Cerebras, respectively. For MG-wafer, we determine TP
and PP sizes using Megatron, enumerate all feasible physical
shapes on wsc (e.g., 1×4, 2×2, 4×1 for TP=4), place them in
the naive serpentine arrangement (Fig. 11(a)) and evaluate the
performance. We pick the best config as results for MG-wafer.

0.6
1.8
Norm. Throughput
Normalized Time
1
2
3
0
1.2
LLama2 30B Llama3 70B Gshard-137B GPT-175B
Throughput Recomp Throughput Time
0
MG: Megatron-GPU MW: Megatron-wafer C: Cerebras W: WATOS
WCMWMGWCMWMGWCMWMGWCMWMG
Fig. 16. Overall performance comparisons among Megatron-GPU, Megatron-
wafer, Cerebras and W ATOS.
80
70
75
30
250 100 200 300
Comp die utilization (%)
WATOS
Megatron-Wafer
WATOS
Megatron-Wafer
35
Time
(b) Comp die utilization
80
%
20
% Bandwidth
Utilization
WATOS (TP=4) MG-wafer (TP=8)
DRAM Memory
Utilization
75%
25%
(a) Heatmap for DRAM and D2D utilization
MG-Wafer
WATOS
Fig. 17. DRAM memory, D2D and computation utilization comparisons
between MG-wafer and W ATOS for GPT 175B.
Fig. 16 compares the normalized throughput and train-
ing time across various LLM models. Compared to MG-
GPU, W ATOS achieves a1.92×higher throughput and
1.75×shorter iteration time. Against MG-wafer and Cerebras,
W ATOS achieves up to 2.74×and 1.53×higher throughput,
along with 2.45×and 1.31×shorter iteration time, respec-
tively. Despite fewer compute resources, W ATOS outperforms
due to efficient operator execution and training-aware schedul-
ing tailored to wafer-scale architectures. The performance
gap between MG-wafer and MG-GPU stems from a23%
reduction in memory resources on MG-wafer and Megatron’s
scheduling policy is optimized for GPU clusters, lacking
the hardware-aware refinements required for wafer-scale sys-
tems. Notably, the proportion of recomputation in W ATOS
is only30%to60%of that in MG-Wafer, exhibiting the
effectiveness of the proposed memory-balancing scheduling to
reduce pipeline bubbles caused by recomputation and promote
training efficiency. Compared to Cerebras, the iteration time
reduction mainly stems from lower communication overhead
and becomes more pronounced under small batch sizes and
short sequences, up to a187.4%improvement, because the
communication cost of weight streaming scales proportionally
with model parallelism degree. These results underscore the
effectiveness of W ATOS on WSCs for efficient LLM training.
Resource Utilization.Fig. 17 presents the heatmap under
GPT-175B. As shown, W ATOS with TP=4 achieves higher
DRAM utilization and bandwidth efficiency than MG-wafer
with TP=8. This is because MG-wafer suffers from inefficient
resource partitioning and placement, leading to longer commu-
nication paths and frequent congestion that stalls computation.
As a result, the compute die utilization in MG-wafer is only
about40%of that in W ATOS. This highlights an insight:With
efficient resource allocation and memory scheduling strategies,
small tensor parallelism can exhibit better performance on
WSCs.
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
0
0.4
0.8
1.2
LLama2 30B Llama3 70B Gshard-137B GPT-175B
Normalized Time
Norm. Throughput
Time Throughput
B: Baseline +R: Recomp. Scheduler +M: Memory Scheduler +GA: Global Optimizer
B +R +M +GA B +R +M +GA B +R +M +GA B +R +M +GA
Fig. 18. Ablation performance of the W ATOS.
Norm. Throughput0
1
2
3
0.6
1.8Normalized Time0
1.2
Throughput Recomp Throughtput TimeThroughput Recomp Throughtput Time
GR-24 SD-3.5-Large Mamba-2.8B Qwen3-Next-80B-A3B
MG: Megatron-GPU MW: Megatron-wafer C: Cerebras W: WATOS
WCMWMG WCMWMG WCMWMG WCMWMG
Fig. 19. W ATOS’s performance on different emerging models.
D. Ablation Experiments
To assess the impact of W ATOS optimizations, we conduct
an ablation study on the 56-die wafer (Config 3). The baseline
uses naive parallelism with fixed TP=8 and PP=7, without
W ATOS’s enhancements. Optimizations are then incrementally
applied:+Renables GCMR recomputation scheduler,+M
adds a location-aware memory scheduler,+GAincorporates
the GA-based global optimizer.
As depicted in Fig.18, we make the following observations:
(1) As the model size increases, the performance benefit of the
centralized scheduler diminishes. (2) In contrast, the perfor-
mance gains from the memory-aware scheduler and recompu-
tation grow with larger models. This is because smaller models
typically require fewer pipeline stages, resulting in relatively
mild memory imbalance issues and thus limited opportunities
for memory scheduling optimization. In contrast, as model
size increases, the pipeline depth grows, making memory
scheduling critical for maintaining computational efficiency.
Moreover, larger models are more susceptible to memory
overflow, which amplifies the benefits of recomputation-based
scheduling. These results highlight that the coordinated use
of memory-aware, and recomputation schedulers in W ATOS
enables efficient training across diverse LLM scales.
VI. DISCUSSION
A. DSE Methods Analysis
Fig. 20 compares the performance of seven representative
DSE studies for training LLMs under the WSC setting. We
reproduce these works and capture their performance on WSC,
including the DNN accelerator DSE framework Timeloop
[105], the training-aware optimization DFModel [59], Calcu-
lon [47], two chiplet-based DSE frameworks: Hecton [46],
Gemini [5], and two wafer-scale DSE schemes: PD [158],
WSC-LLM [156]. Five key insights are made:1)Timeloop
performs worst as it targets only core-level workload parti-
tioning, neglecting DRAM-aware and inter-die optimizations.
2)DFModel and Calculon partially improve performance
by considering multi-dimensional parallel spaces. Calculon’s
additional use of training memory-saving techniques provides

0
1
2
3
4
Llama2 30B Llama3 70B Gshard 137B GPT 175B
0
1
2
3
4
Norm. Throughput
Normalized Time
T: Timeloop D: DFModel C: Calculon H: Hecton G: Gemini P: PD W: WSC-LLM WA: WATOS
T D C H G P W WAT D C H G P W WAT D C H G P W WAT D C H G P W WA
Time Throughput
Fig. 20. Performance comparisons among W ATOS and DSE methods.
0
0.6
1.2
1.8
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
1D TP 2D TP TACOS 1D TP 2D TP TACOS
Llama 30B GPT 175B
Computation Time All Reduce Time Throughput
Norm. Throughput
Normalized Time
Fig. 21. Performance of different TP strategies and (TP, PP) configs.
more performance gains.3)Hecaton and Gemini fully account
for communication in a 2D mesh, but as chiplet-oriented
designs, they focus on reducing DRAM accesses rather than
DRAM capacity, which leads to suboptimal performance.
Moreover, Hecaton’s 2D TP relies on bypass links, resulting in
additional communication costs on a 2D mesh topology.4)PD
explores optimal topologies and logical designs in topological
spaces but does not alleviate DRAM scarcity on WSCs, and its
interconnect-focused design can worsen memory constraints.
5)WSC-LLM explores the optimal LLM inference architec-
ture under area constraints; however, its design space is sub-
optimal due to the lack of recomputation-aware optimization.
Overall, W ATOS achieves superior performance by jointly
considering WSC topology constraints, area trade-offs, and
memory balance.
B. Expansion of Parallelism Seach Space
Fig. 21 demonstrates W ATOS’s performance in the ex-
panded parallelism search space, including 2D TP proposed by
GSPMD [155], RingBiOdd [62] and TACOS [151]. The WSC
configuration remains consistent withConfig3. Notably,
RingBiOdd is employed to implement 7-instance TP that
cannot be handled by the naive AllReduce [11].
Fig. 21 illustrates two key insights:1)The expanded parallel
search space does not alter the optimal design point. Although
TACOS and RingBiOdd support odd TP instances and TACOS
outperforms at larger TP sizes, they still cannot overcome
the increasing communication overhead as TP size grows.
2)2D TP yields the worst performance on the 2D mesh
topology. While 2D TP can decompose large TPs, it is not
tailored for LLMs, leading to higher communication volume
and significant tail latency on a 2D mesh. Collectively, 2D
TP, RingBiOdd, and TACOS expand W ATOS’s parallel search
space while leaving the optimal design point unchanged.
C. Architectural Generality
Fig. 19 demonstrates remarkable generality of W ATOS
across emerging models, including Generative Recommender
[162] for recommendation, Stable Diffusion [20] for image
(a) WATOS Robust Mechanism (b) Performance of WATOS across different fault rate
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0 0.15 0.3 0.45 0.6
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0 0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8
WATOS Baseline
WATOS Baseline
Fault Localization
Type ?
Adaptive
Rerouting
Router
Die fault rate
Link fault rate
Norm.
Throughtput
Norm.
Throughtput
Link-quality-
aware
Scheduling
Core-aware
Wokload
Scheduling
Router Central Scheduler
Link Die
50% Perf. Loss
50% Perf. Loss
Rapid
Degradation
Gradual
Degradation
Fig. 22. The robustness and reliability design of W ATOS.
(a) Mesh-switch topology
Switch
Network
Switch
Network
LLama2 30B Llama3 70B Gshard-137B GPT-175B
Norm. Throughput
0
1
2
3
0.6
1.8Normalized Time
0
1.2
(b) Performance comparison on mesh-switch topology
Throughput Recomp Throughput Time
Fig. 23. W ATOS performance on Mesh-switch topology.
and video generation, as well as new LLM architectures such
as Mamba [14, 27] and Qwen3-Next [111], which are based
on state space models and linear gated attention, respectively.
The hardware configuration remains consistent withConfig
3.
The strong generality of W ATOS stems from three key fac-
tors. 1) W ATOS offers configurable architectural parameters to
enable adaptation to diverse wafer-scale hardware setups and
performs end-to-end scheduling to optimize large-scale model
training. 2) W ATOS is operator-centric rather than model-
specific, allowing it to accommodate new model workloads
by extending DNN predictor, TP engine and compute die
configurations without hardware modifications whenever new
operators emerge. 3) W ATOS targets structural characteristics
common to large-scale neural network training, addressing
memory imbalance across pipeline stages and employing
adaptive recomputation strategies rather than relying on any
specific LLM or hardware architecture. Overall, W ATOS
demonstrates strong generality in large-scale model training
rather than being a niche framework tailored for a niche
architecture.
D. Robustness and reliability
As shown in Fig. 22 (a), W ATOS introduces a 3-stage
system-level robustness design:1)fault localization and classi-
fication,2)link-quality- and core-aware workload scheduling,
and3)adaptive rerouting.For link faults, the router contin-
uously monitors the quality of its connected links, such as
packet loss rate and peak D2D bandwidth. Upon detecting
degradation, it proactively reduces the communication load
on the affected links and reroutes the excess traffic to the
nearest alternative path using well-established routing algo-
rithms [92, 109]. In the rare case of a complete link failure, no
traffic is allocated to the broken link.For die faults, prolonged
operation may lead to core degradation, resulting in reduced
die performance. The central scheduler dynamically adjusts

workload distribution based on the degree of degradation,
assigning less workload to the faulty die and redistributing
tasks to healthy ones to maintain computation balance. Die
failures, rare but critical, trigger the W ATOS to mark the faulty
die and its links as unavailable, excluding them from further
workload allocation.
To evaluate fault-tolerance performance, we conduct experi-
ments on WSC Config 3 across diverse LLM workloads, using
the non-robust version of W ATOS as the baseline and manually
injecting failures. As depicted in Fig. 22, under a 20% link
fault rate and a 20% die fault rate, the fault-tolerant W ATOS
achieves 18% and 35% higher throughput, respectively, bene-
fiting from the system-level robustness optimization.
E. Topology Compatibility
Fig. 23 evaluates the performance of W ATOS on mesh-
switch topology proposed by [158]. As illustrated in Fig.
23 (a), we reconfigureConfig3to 48 dies arranged in a
12×2×2 mesh with a switch network offering 1.6 TB/s of
bandwidth. The GPU baseline is scaled to ensure equiva-
lent compute capability. Fig. 23 (b) illustrates that W ATOS
maintains superior performance compared to Megatron and
Cerebras on the Mesh-switch topology, because:1)W ATOS
restricts TP within the mesh to fully leverage its high band-
width and routes the lightweight inter-stage communication
via the switch;2)the flexible switch enhances communication
within mem pair, alleviating potential congestion. By contrast,
Megatron’s lack of mesh awareness leads to oversized TP and
switch-limited All-Reduce, while Cerebras’ weight streaming
similarly underutilizes mesh bandwidth and remains switch-
bound. In such case, W ATOS sustains high performance on
mesh-switch topologies, demonstrating strong compatibility
across diverse interconnect topologies.
3D Stacking variants.The 3D stacking [68, 69, 164]
which vertically places DRAM on top of compute dies fun-
damentally shifts the memory access pattern and architectural
trade-offs on WSC:1)DRAM access exhibits a local-remote
gap. Local DRAM accesses traverse only the hybrid bonding
interface, whereas remote accesses to DRAM on other com-
pute dies must go through the NoC.2)3D stacking decouples
area competition between DRAM and compute dies, which
allows fully allocating IOs to D2D interconnects, enabling
larger DRAM capacity, higher compute density and increased
D2D bandwidth across the wafer. Nonetheless, 3D stacking
does not fundamentally alter the intrinsic characteristics of
LLM training on WSCs:1)Communication relies on a high-
bandwidth 2D mesh, which achieves high utilization for small
TP size.2)Memory imbalance across pipeline stages necessi-
tates recomputation.3)Unbalanced recomputation introduces
bubbles, degrading performance. Thus, W ATOS still remains
competitive under 3D stacking, with a more relaxed trade-off.
F . Scalability for Multi-WSC Scenarios
We construct a WSC node composed of four Config-3
wafers and compare its performance against Megatron [122]
to evaluate the scalability of W ATOS, which comprises four
0.2
0.6
1
1.4
0.2
0.6
1
1.4
Throughput Recomp Throughput Time
GPT-175B Llama3-405B Deepseek V3 671B
Normalized Time
(a) Scaled performance of WATOS for multi-wafer scenario
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
0
0.5
1
1.5
2
2.5
3
3.5
Norm. Throughput
(b) Trade-off in Global Optimizer
1
1.1
1.2
1.3
1.4
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Norm. Throughput
Exploration Steps
The Slowest
Convergence The Fastest
Convergence
Performance Gap
ω = 0 ω = 0.25
ω = 0.5 ω = 0.75
ω = 1.0
Fig. 24. (a) W ATOS performance on multi-wafer scenarios. (b) Time-
performance trade-off in the global optimizer.
nodes, each containing eight NVIDIA Blackwell ultra GPUs.
For wafer-to-wafer (W2W) interconnect bandwidth, we con-
sider two configurations: 1) W ATOS-18, which employs a
SOTA W2W interconnect [127] delivering 1.8 TB/s band-
width; and 2) W ATOS-4, which adopts a 400 GB/s W2W
bandwidth configuration, equivalent to the inter-node band-
width of Megatron. Further, we evaluate the capability of
W ATOS in training ultra-large models, including LLaMA3-
405B [84] and Deepseek V3-671B [17].
As shown in Fig. 24 (a), two key insights emerge: 1)
W ATOS consistently outperforms Megatron in both high-
and low-bandwidth W2W configurations; 2) W ATOS achieves
greater performance gains when scaling to ultra-large LLMs,
demonstrating superior scalability. These findings arise from
two main factors. For insight (1), W ATOS outperforms for
its ability to fully utilize the compute and memory resources
within a single wafer, thereby reducing the reliance on W2W
communication. For Insight (2), the scalability advantage
stems from the high memory demand of large models. For
example, Llama3-405B requires around 5670 GB of memory
to store model weights, optimizer states, and gradients. As a
result, Megatron must distribute the model across at least three
8-GPU servers. In contrast, two WSCs are sufficient, requiring
at most a hop cross-wafer communication. Therefore, even
W ATOS-4 can achieve significant performance gains.
Hardware DSE.With the proposed hardware template, we
explore the design space at die granularity, considering dies
from 200 mm2 to 600 mm2, categorized as Small (<400 mm 2)
or Large, and as Square (aspect ratio<1.2) or Rectangle.
The DSE objective is the product of memory capacity and
throughput. As depicted in Fig. 25, under diverse workloads,
Small Square configurations deliver superior performance by
providing longer edges for D2D links and better area utiliza-
tion, whereas Rectangle layouts underutilize area along single
dimension, reducing both throughput and memory capacity.
However, the high power density of Small Square configura-
tions imposes strict cooling and power delivery constraints,
leading current WSCs to favor Large Square design.
VII. RELATEDWORKS
LLM training framework.Numerous frameworks [29,
60, 71, 90, 112, 116, 122, 129, 167] have been developed
to improve LLM training efficiency on GPUs. For example,
Alpa [167] decomposes the parallelism space into inter- and
intra-operator dimensions to generate optimized execution
plans, while Colossal-AI [71] supports modular parallelism

Llama3 70B Deepseek V3 671B
Norm. Throughput
Norm. Throughput
Norm. Memory CapacityNorm. Memory Capacity
Large RectangleLarge Rectangle
Large SquareLarge Square
Small RectangleSmall Rectangle
Small SquareSmall Square
Optimal ConfigOptimal Config
Large Rectangle
Large Square
Small Rectangle
Small Square
Optimal Config
Large RectangleLarge Rectangle
Large SquareLarge Square
Small RectangleSmall Rectangle
Small SquareSmall Square
Optimal ConfigOptimal Config
Large Rectangle
Large Square
Small Rectangle
Small Square
Optimal Config
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1 0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1
0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1
Fig. 25. Hardware DSE. Points of the same color denote configurations with
the same die size category (Small or Large) and shape (Square or Rectangle),
while different markers indicate different size categories and shape settings.
across data, tensor, and pipeline levels. However, these works
are tailored to fully-connected GPUs and are not optimized
for WSCs with 2D mesh interconnects. Thus, they overlook
opportunities to exploit on-wafer bandwidth for fine-grained
resource allocation.
Architectural DSE for Die-Level.Numerous studies [36,
37, 82, 105, 153, 160] have been devoted to architec-
tural exploration. For example, Timeloop [105] develop a
workload mapping-exploration framework to systematically
optimize DNN accelerator designs. Sparseloop [153] ex-
tends sparse workloads, while Ruby [37] further handles
imperfectly-factorized mappings. Regarding DSE methods,
many works [2, 15, 26, 55, 118, 125, 148] employ genetic
algorithms. Harpocrates [55] uses program mutation operators
to automatically generate efficient test programs, while [125]
proposes a variable-length encoding scheme with tailored
operators to optimize CNN architectures. These operators are
task-specific and difficult to generalize across training tasks
on WSC.
For communication DSE. Several works
[22, 47, 59, 62, 114, 115, 132, 151] explore the design
space of parallelism and network topology. FRED [114]
investigates the optimal switch topology and corresponding
parallelization strategies at the wafer scale. TACOS [151]
searches for optimal collective communication algorithms
for a given topology by leveraging a time-expanded
network representation and a link-chunk matching algorithm.
Nonetheless, these approaches lack consideration of DRAM
capacity during LLM training.
For chiplets. Current studies investigate architecture [5, 52,
99, 163, 165], dataflow [24, 98] and SRAM optimizations
[25, 120]. However, these works focus on DNN inference
in the chiplet scale, whereas our focus is on optimizing
LLM training efficiency in WSCs.For WSCs, existing works
[7, 23, 31, 40, 67, 101, 102, 114, 135, 144, 149, 156–
158, 161, 169] have explored the design space of wafer-scale
architectures, as well as floorplan design [50, 76, 80, 100].
However, existing works predominantly focus on inference,
leaving training strategy co-design largely unexplored. While
TMAC [144] pioneers the exploration of resource trade-offs
under constrained wafer-scale area for recomputation, it lacks
a global optimization strategy, which makes it difficult to
identify the optimal design point. In summary, to the best of
our knowledge, no prior work has systematically investigated
optimal parallelism strategies and resource allocation for LLM
training on wafer-scale systems, making W ATOS the first to
address this problem.
VIII. CONCLUSION
This paper presents W ATOS, an efficient framework for co-
exploring LLM training and architecture on WSCs. Leveraging
WSCs’ high D2D bandwidth and unique topology, W ATOS
optimizes parallelism, recomputation scheduling, placement,
and memory allocation to improve LLM training performance.
Experiments show that W ATOS achieves2.74×throughput
gains over Megatron and1.53×than Cerebras.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was supported in part by the National Science
and Technology Major Project under Grant 2022ZD0115200;
the NSFC under Grant 62125403, and Grant 92164301; Bei-
jing S&T Project Z221100007722023; in part by the project
funding for the 2022 Special Project on Industrial Foundation
Reconstruction and High Quality Development of Manufactur-
ing Industry CEIEC-2022-ZM020245; in part by the Beijing
National Research Center for Information Science and Tech-
nology; and in part by the Beijing Advanced Innovation Center
for Integrated Circuits.
