record_id: s2:9d8ffad7a696416268c42c0b742c442ebcc03258
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2601.02389
fetched_title: Generative AI for Networking
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:14Z

1
Generative AI for Networking
Faisal Zaman 1, Ouns Bouachir 2, Moayad Aloqaily 3, and Ismaeel Al Ridhawi 4
1University of Montreal, Canada
2Zayed University, UAE
3United Arab Emirates University (UAEU), Al Ain, UAE.
4Kuwait College of Science and Technology, Kuwait
Emails: faisal.zaman@umontreal.ca; ouns.bouachir@zu.ac.ae; maloqaily@uaeu.ac.ae; i.alridhawi@kcst.edu.kw
Abstract—Generative Artificial Intelligence (GenAI) and Large
Language Models (LLMs) are revolutionizing network man-
agement systems, paving the way towards fully autonomous
and self-optimizing communication systems. These models en-
able networks to address complex decision-making tasks across
both short-term operational scenarios and long-term strategic
planning. Through natural language understanding, LLMs can
analyze customer inquiries, predict network congestion patterns,
and automate troubleshooting processes, leading to more efficient
customer support and network maintenance. GenAI can optimize
content delivery by generating personalized recommendations,
improving user engagement, and dynamically adjusting network
resources based on real-time demands, ultimately enhancing
overall performance and user experience in telecommunication
services. In this paper, we discuss the pivotal role of GenAI
in advancing network performance and achieving the ultimate
objective of self-adaptive networks. Moreover, we present a use
case that leverages the self-attention mechanism of transformers
to perform long-term traffic prediction. Harnessing these cutting-
edge technologies demonstrates the transformative power of
LLM and GenAI in revolutionizing telecommunication networks,
elevating resilience and adaptability to unprecedented levels.
Index Terms—Large Language Model (LLM), Transformers,
GenAI, Self-Adaptive Networks.
I. INTRODUCTION
The rapid emergence of advanced technologies has in-
creased the complexity of modern network management. Vari-
ous software tools are used in improving network management
and optimization. The most commonly used technique is
to leverage descriptive models. Descriptive-based Artificial
Intelligence (AI) models have labels and can assist in making
an informed decision about providing information on outages,
channel capacity enhancement, and classification of new traffic
types. But as the complexity and heterogeneity of manag-
ing self-organizing networks increases, a need to explore
other techniques and approaches is required. Generative AI,
including tools like ChatGPT and Gemini, has undeniably
reshaped the technology landscape, unlocking transformational
use cases, such as creating original content, generating code,
and expediting customer service. The scope of this technology
continues to expand on a daily basis.
Generative models are focused on creating new data or
simulating complex systems to improve decision making and
optimize network performance in telecommunications. Several
proposals have been made to take advantage of this generative
capability in order to improve network performance. Most of
these approaches focus on how GenAI technology can enhance
the user experience or offer a high-level overview of various
network solutions.
The authors in [1] provide an overview of different GenAI
solutions such as the generation of text, audio, images, and
video, in addition to the interconversion between them. With
that said, there is still a lack of discussion on the use of GenAI
in the context of networking. In [2], [3], and [4], the use of
LLMs is discussed primarily from a conceptual perspective,
emphasizing theoretical viewpoints while providing limited
analysis of existing practical solutions. In [4], the authors
discuss various aspects of the communication channel from
a wireless perspective, where GenAI can be applied, such
as the receiver (Rx), transmitter (Tx) and communication
channels. They also provide a use-case for GenAI in Tx
and Rx to improve Signal-to-Noise Ratio (SNR). In [5], the
use of LLMs is outlined along with a demonstration of a
simple use case. Various applications of LLMs for networking
verticals are discussed, and key enabling technologies such
as prompt engineering are highlighted. ChatNet is proposed
as a system that translates prompts into network planning
designs. The focus is predominantly on language models,
with evaluations conducted using GPT-4 to illustrate network
planning, assessing the ML model rather than the results’
outcomes. Moreover, GANs are utilized in the framework
to estimate generative models through an adversarial process
involving the simultaneous training of a discriminator and
a generator to identify anomalies in the data. The work in
[6] discusses several GAN architectures used to determine
anomalies in the data. The paper provides an overview of how
GANs can be used for anomaly detection and does not focus
on telecommunication aspects.
To the best of our knowledge, there is a lack of discussion on
the use of GenAI with LLM to improve network management
in the literature along with use-cases. In this paper, we propose
a long-term traffic prediction use-case for end-to-end network
slice handling in Beyobd 5G (B5G) networks. In summary,
the contributions of this paper are as follows:
1) Provide a survey of different proposals that use gener-
ative AI to provide improved and enhanced end-to-end
telecommunication networks.
2) Discuss different avenues and gaps that need to be
investigated with GenAI.
3) Present a use-case for traffic prediction and application
arXiv:2601.02389v1 [cs.NI] 24 Dec 2025

2
of optimal policies for end-to-end network slices using
transformers.
II. GENERATIVEAITOIMPROVEEND-ENDNETWORKING
A. What is Generative AI ?
Generative models are a class of neural networks that are
capable of generating new data from the pretrained data. The
overall process of the GenAI model is shown in Figure 1.
Each observation consists of many features (i.e., for an image
generation, the features are usually the individual pixel values).
It is our goal to build a model that can generate new sets of
features that look as if they have been created using the same
rules as the original data. Conceptually, for image generation
this is an incredibly difficult task, considering the vast number
of ways that individual pixel values can be assigned and the
relatively tiny number of such arrangements that constitute
an image of the entity we are trying to simulate. Sampling
refers to the process of generating new data samples from
a learned probability distribution. This distribution represents
the underlying patterns and structure of the training data on
which the generative model has been trained. Sampling is a
fundamental aspect of generative models because it allows
them to create new synthetic data points that are similar to
the data they were trained on. By drawing samples from the
learned distribution, the generative model can produce outputs
that exhibit characteristics, patterns, and statistical properties
similar to the original data.
Fig. 1. Overview of GenAI process.
The specific method used for sampling can vary depend-
ing on the type of generative model used. For example, in
variational autoencoders (V AEs), sampling involves drawing
samples from the latent space distribution. This is typically
done by sampling from a simple distribution (e.g., Gaussian)
and then transforming these samples through the decoder
network. In generative adversarial networks (GANs), sampling
involves feeding random noise into the generator network
and generating fake data samples. Generative AI can be
classified in different ways, such as categorizing according
to the application or based on the underlying model used.
Based on different types of model, we can broadly classify
them into five main types, namely,i)variational autoencoders,
ii)generative adversarial networks,iii)autoregressive models,
iv)flow-based models, andv)energy-based models. GenAI
models that focus explicitly on determining the probability
density function are categorized as explicit models. Whereas
ones such as GAN are implicit and rely on an approximation
of the latent space.
B. Generative AI vs Descriptive AI
Generative AI is a branch of AI that can create new content
or output based on patterns it has learned from existing data.
This type of AI can generate text, images, and music, to
name a few, and mimics the style of the original data it was
trained on. This means that generative AI can produce original
and creative content that is not directly copied from existing
data. Most of the large models such as LLMs including
ChatGPT models fall under the category of Generative AI.
Mathematically, the probability can be described as as P(x),
where x is the probability of an event to occur. In contrast, a
descriptive AI model can analyze and summarize existing data
or provide insights based on patterns it has identified in the
data. This type of AI does not create new content, but rather
describes and explains the existing data on which it has been
trained. Descriptive AI is commonly used for tasks such as
data analysis, trend prediction, and decision-making based on
data patterns. The probability can be described as P(x|y).
C. Improving Communication using Generative AI Models
The application of GenAI for improving communications
can be broadly classified as shown in Fig. 2. The three
categories can be used to generally categorize the application
of GenAI; however, they are not exclusive.
Fig. 2. Different Networking AI applications for Networking.
1) Transformer Model:These belong to a class of deep
neural networks. The primary challenge addressed by the
transformer model is the parallelization of tasks through the
use of the attention layer, which was not possible with the
existing models for sequential data [26]. The key components
of this model are: Attention layer, Encoder-Decoder, Positional
encoder, Multi-head attention, and Feed-forward network.
Self-attention allows the model to weigh the importance of
different words in a sequence, enabling it to capture contextual
relationships effectively. The feed-forward neural networks
provide non-linear transformations of the self-attention out-
puts, facilitating more complex feature representations. Addi-
tionally, positional encoding is used to incorporate sequence-
order information. The model is structured into multiple layers
of these blocks, with each layer iteratively refining the repre-
sentation of the input sequence. Several use cases exist in the
networking domain:

3
1)Policy Generation: Policy can be defined as network
rules or directions that dictate how traffic flows through
network links. OpenFlow rules, P4 rules, and other
forwarding rules, such as multi-protocol label switching
(MPLS) and segment routing, decide how network traffic
will be routed. The network configuration and modeling
rules can be cumbersome, mainly during the congestion
interval. To anticipate the network traffic increase and
to define network policy to handle different service
providers to support a self-optimizing network from
an end-to-end network perspective is crucial to support
current network demands [7]. In [8], the authors demon-
strated the automation of intent-based decomposition
and execution of network policies. They compared the
proposal with the few-shot capability of LLMs. To solve
the problem in hand, they proposed a pipeline that pro-
gressively decomposes intents by generating the required
actions using policy-based abstraction. This assisted in
the automation of policy execution by creating a closed
control loop for the intent of deployment. Talha et al. [9]
proposed such an automated approach to model policy.
2)Traffic Prediction: To circumvent the limitation often
associated with traffic prediction using the time series
methods such as Recurrent Neural Network (RNN) and
Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM), LLM and trans-
formers have been utilized to bring better relationships
between higher degrees of parameters. In [10], the
authors proposed a solution called the heterogeneous
and temporal model based on the transformer (H-Trans)
which aims to better integrate neighbor information to
capture the structure of the network. The system is com-
pared with the baseline for the link prediction task on
three real datasets. The idea is to predict network links in
a complicated, densely connected network. This can be
widely used for wireless networks. The proposed model
does not discuss the networks related to telecommunica-
tions and provides a general link prediction mechanism
for heterogeneous graphs. Transformers can be used to
predict traffic on a given link with the help of different
inputs. The authors in [11] proposed Autoformer, which
is a transformer-based traffic prediction method in O-
RAN. The predicted traffic is used to control the sleep
cycle of certain energy-intensive O-RAN applications,
such as traffic steering, which typically runs for the
entire duration. The scope of the paper is limited by the
prediction of traffic in a specific domain. The authors
focused on short-term traffic prediction and do not
discuss the scenario in case of prediction failure.
3)Synthetic Data: One of the challenges that may arise
when integrating AI with telecommunications is the
availability of data. With the use of LLM models, few
proposals have been made around generating synthetic
network data that can be used to train the network
models. The work in [20] trained GPT-3 to generate
ICMP and DNS packets. The generated packets were
converted to flow using Python scripts. Since there is
limited availability of the training data, this can help in
simulating and testing networks. Only two types of net-
work packets were trained. Training data for generating
different types of network packets was limited.
2) Diffusion Model:Diffusion models are a class of gener-
ative models that operate by iteratively refining a probability
distribution over the data space. They were introduced to
address the challenge of generating high-quality samples, espe-
cially in the domain of image generation. The key idea behind
diffusion models is to model the data generation process
as a series of diffusion steps, where noise is progressively
added to the data until the probability distribution of the true
data is achieved. The underlying concepts of the diffusion
model can be leveraged to solve some of the challenges in
communication, which are:
1)Traffic Prediction: Traffic prediction has been one of
the most investigated topics. Several ML approaches can
be used to predict traffic, but one of the limitations
of traditional supervised learning is the non-existence
of an attention mechanism. The authors in [12] have
used the diffusion model to predict traffic. The authors
leverage the diffusion model to determine the topological
relations of the links and to predict the next step of
congestion. To include the nuances of the network
graph, the authors included traffic attributes as part of
representing the directed network graph. The model
used is the diffusion-based Convolution Neural Network
(CNN). The results show that the inclusion of different
graph relationships can drastically improve the traffic
prediction model.
2)Channel Encoding and Compression: Semantic com-
munication refers to the exchange of meaning between
individuals or entities through various forms of language
or symbols. In telecommunications, it is used to re-
duce redundant information transmission and to improve
channel utilization. Several proposals have leveraged AI
to improve existing semantic communication [23]. C.
Dong et al. [22] leveraged generative AI to determine
semantic relationships. The semantic communication
system is designed based on the Shannon-based physical
layer, and the AI models are integrated into the transmit-
ter and receiver. Model propagation is the main feature
of the proposed solution. The authors also proposed
metrics called semantic service quality to evaluate the
performance and accuracy of semantic-based communi-
cation. The solution was tested with image compression
and transmission.
3) Generative Adversarial Network:GANs consist of two
key architecture blocks: the generator and the discriminator.
The generator generates synthetic data samples by mapping
random noise vectors to output data representations, in an at-
tempt to mimic the distribution of real data. The discriminator,
on the other hand, is trained to distinguish between real and
fake data samples. It provides feedback to the generator by
assessing the realism of its generated samples. This adver-
sarial training process encourages the generator to produce
increasingly realistic samples, while the discriminator becomes
more adept at distinguishing between real and fake data. The
interaction between these two components leads to the conver-

4
gence of the generator towards generating highly realistic data
samples. Random noise refers to a set of randomly generated
input values that are fed into the generator network. This
noise typically follows a Gaussian or uniform distribution.
The purpose of this noise is to provide the generator with a
source of randomness, allowing it to produce various outputs
during the generation process. One of the most commonly
discussed applications of GAN in telecommunication is its
use for anomaly detection. The authors in [21], proposed a
GAN-based solution for anomaly detection in binary fashion in
networks. The proposed solution consists of a property scaling
module and a GAN-based detection module. The scaling
module selects features to detect anomalies effectively in a
minority of cases. The detection module detects to cope with
class imbalances in intrusion detection. They also use GAN
to generate new data.
Various LLM-based models have been employed in numer-
ous studies to enhance network performance. There are still
several areas that need to be investigated in GenAI-enabled
telecommunication. Some of the areas are:
1)GenAI for Optical Communications: Our existing
network is largely based on optical communication.
More than 90% of global communication occurs through
fiber networks. Focusing on topics such as creating the
best channel strategies, optimizing regions, and refining
location optimization for greenfield deployment could
be beneficial.
2)Relationship Determination: One of the challenges of
machine learning is the relationship determination of
models with a huge set of influencing parameters. For
example, capricious traffic changes can be due to several
factors in the area. To accurately predict this using
traditional models can be computationally impractical,
but the use of LLMs has proven otherwise. Using an
attention layer with a transformer is an example of
how a sequentially related task can be converted into
parallel tasks. Similar approaches can be used to create
relationships between different events and parallelize the
workflow.
3)Confluence of different GenAI Approaches: GenAI
for telecommunications is still in its infancy and focuses
on using a single type of model for solving specific
solutions. The ultimate goal is to create a self-optimizing
network. To achieve such a goal, it is required to use
more than one type of model and to work symbiotically.
III. USESCASE: POLICYGENERATION FOREND-TO-END
NETWORKSLICING
In the context of a network service provider that oversees
multiple network slices, each endowed with constrained re-
sources, dynamic management of these resources in network
slices is imperative. This entails the scaling of network slices.
However, for effective resource allocation across various net-
work slices, the provider must forecast demand within each
slice. Long-term forecasting is extremely important, as it
provides enough time for service providers to make policy
changes and infrastructure upgrades. Many of the existing
Fig. 3. Functional Block Diagram of System Model and Network Slice
Management.
solutions such as Informer [25] and other averaging methods
such as root mean square do not capture the peaks or do not
consider different parameters to accurately predict long-term
forecasts. Our proposal primarily addresses the challenge of
predicting long-term network traffic.
A. System Model
The proposed system model for training and generating
policies to scale different slices is shown in Figure 3. The
system comprises of the following:
•Telemetry:It is responsible for collecting metrics from
the system. Different databases are available to collect
and store data. We leverage the Prometheus database to
manage our time-series metrics. Prometheus uses its own
time-series database written in Go, which is optimized for
high performance and efficient storage of time-series data.
This repository serves as the central repository wherein
all metrics garnered by Prometheus are deposited and
subsequently retrieved for analysis and interpretation. The
input to telemetry can be captured from all the network
elements that are part of the service provider that owns
all different network slices. The different elements of
designing telemetry solutions and design considerations
on the types of data collection utilized, the granularity,
and other aspects are beyond the scope of this paper.
We assume that the overhead of collecting and managing
data from the network is negligible. The data from
the telemetry is fed to the preprocessing and feature
extraction.
•Preprocessing:This step plays a key role in ensuring
that the data is normalized and can be utilized by the
AI engine. Several steps must be performed. The key
preprocessings considered in our model are data cleaning,
temporal alignment, normalization, and aggregation.

5
TABLE I
AUTOFORMER VSOTHERTRANSFORMER BASEDGENAIFOR TRAFFIC
PREDICTION
Autoformer Other GenAI (e.g., Informer, Log-
Trans)
Auto-correlation Layer - responsi-
ble for determining dependencies
and aggregate information at the
sub-series level based on periodic-
ity
Uses Self-Attention layer which
discovers dependencies and aggre-
gates information at the point-wise
level.
Uses deep Decomposition block as
an inner block to separate intricate
temporal patterns
Has found to be unreliable for find-
ing long-term temporal patterns
such a seasons and trends leading
to entangled temporal patterns.
Has aO(LLogL)where L is the
length of time-series
Can be fromO(L 2)to
O(LLogL)depending on
different layers an use cases.
Hence this requires more than
one type of transformer model to
predict traffic.
Better suited for capturing season-
ality of complex real-world using
hourly based data
cannot handle seasonality predic-
tion
•Feature selection:Depending on the problem consid-
ered, we can select different features to get the best
results. In most cases, feature selection is part of prepro-
cessing. In our scenario, we consider the rate of packet
flow as the feature to predict the traffic in relation to time.
•Slice-level Traffic Prediction:This represents our AI
models in consideration. We utilize Autoformers to pre-
dict long-term traffic. As pointed out, the existing models
have a limitation when predicting for long-term [11].
The authors in [24] prove that transformer-based models
show promise in capturing long-term dependencies, they
face computational constraints and struggle with intricate
temporal patterns. To address these issues, the authors
propose Autoformer. This architecture combines decom-
position techniques with an Auto-Correlation mechanism.
This enables the progressive decomposition of time se-
ries and series-level information aggregation based on
periodicity, enhancing both accuracy and computational
efficiency. Hence, we leverage Autoformers in our work
for long-term traffic prediction. The other reason for using
Autoformers as apposed to other GenAI based approach
for traffic prediction are described in the table I. The
predicted traffic output should be utilized to reconfigure
existing network slices to ensure that the right number of
slices is available to support the upcoming traffic change.
•Policy Generation:To create policies that can be easily
translated to network setup, we employ various LLM
models to handle traffic for network devices. The key
benefit of using LLM is the accuracy of the policy
generated for the heterogeneous network.
•Slice Coordination and Configuration:This module
coordinates with different network agents in the right
order to ensure that the policy gets applied to the net-
work elements. This also includes coordinating with the
infrastructure service provider in parts that are not owned
by the service provider.
Fig. 4. Major Steps Used for Model Preprocessing.
Fig. 5. Albeini Network used for Analysis.
B. Implementation
As a proof of concept, we implemented an Autoformer-
based traffic prediction method. The results are compared with
the Informer-based approach. The traffic data is generated
based on the demand matrix available on the SDNLib. The
simulation and other preprocessing are done using Python,
leveraging libraries such as PyTorch, Matplotlib, and Pandas.
The data is divided using the standard approach of 60:20:20
for training, validation, and testing. To generate network data
for simulation purposes we performed several key steps. These
steps are depicted in Figure 4.
1)Network Topology Selection: We used the Albenin
topology retrieved from the archive [27] for network
topology. It records network demand every five minutes
along with the latitude and longitude positions of the
network. The network connectivity is shown in Figure
5. The topology was cleaned and the connectivity and
relevant traffic data were extracted from the archive.
2)Demand Matrix Consolidation: The data available was
for every five minutes for six months. For a proof-of-
concept, we consolidated this data and took the maxi-
mum of each day for each demand. The demand matrix
is shown in Figure 6.
3)Routing of Demand: To map the topology connectivity
with the routing of demands, we used the Dijkstra
algorithm and consolidated common path traffic to create
several manageable network slices. Once we have the
view of these slices, we added the visualization to
understand the routing and demand requirement for each
slice.

6
4)Network Slices: The common routes are consolidated
and different network slices were formed. Each slice
can serve multiple services of similar Quality of Service
(QoS) classes. In our context, we are not focused on
the type of network slices, but in the future, we will
be including this parameter to improve the prediction
algorithm.
C. Limitations
Although Autoformer demonstrates strong potential for net-
work traffic prediction, several key practical considerations
must be addressed to ensure its effective deployment in real-
world networks especially in wireless B5G networks. For
instance, in such environments, traffic dynamics are influenced
not only by data flow but also by interference, which can
significantly distort predictions and lead to false traffic esti-
mations.
Efficient data collection is another critical factor. Long-term
time series prediction requires high-quality data across mul-
tiple network components, including traffic type, bandwidth
utilization, interference levels, user mobility, and sampling fre-
quency. Each of these parameters directly impacts data quality
and, consequently, the accuracy of the predictive model.
Hyperparameter optimization remains a major challenge.
Parameters such as the autocorrelation factor and input se-
quence length must be carefully tuned, often through extensive
sensitivity analyses. While RL techniques can be employed to
automate this process, their integration introduces additional
complexity and computational overhead.
Furthermore, Autoformer models exhibit limited capability
in data augmentation. To address this, complementary GenAI
techniques particularly those based on LLMs can be leveraged
to synthesize realistic training data, thereby enhancing the
robustness and generalization of Autoformer based predictors.
D. Results and Discussion
The results obtained from Autoformer [24] are shown in
Figures 7 and 8. The x-axis refers to the Standard Scalar value
obtained by removing mean and scaling to variance. This helps
in normalizing the data. The y-axis refers to the time steps.
Figure 7 shows the performance of Autoformer in predicting
a shorter duration of about 30 time steps. Whereas Figure 8
shows the long-term view of the prediction. The Autoformer is
Fig. 6. Traffic Demand Matrix.
0 5 10 15 20 25 30 35
2
1
0
1
2
3
TrueValue
Prediction
Fig. 7. Prediction using Autoformers Model on Network traffic for the short
duration 36-time steps
0 20 40 60 80
2
1
0
1
2
3
TrueValue
Prediction
Fig. 8. Prediction using Autoformers Model on Network traffic for the short
duration 96 time steps
optimized for long-term prediction, and hence we see that the
prediction is relatively flat for short-term results. Whereas for
long-term predictions, it follows the variations in traffic. It is
clear from the results that the predictor follows the peaks and
the overall traffic pattern. For the Informers, shown in Figure
9, we see that the smoothing algorithm removed the peaks and
flattens the traffic pattern giving a wrong signal. Even though
the algorithm is not predicting at the highest accuracy, we
believe that by including necessary parameters in the input,
it can be proved that the long-term prediction can easily be
achieved using Autoformers.
IV. CONCLUSION
This paper provided a comprehensive survey of various pro-
posals, leveraging generative AI (GenAI) to enhance commu-
nication networks through end-to-end network optimization.
It highlighted key avenues and identifies gaps that require
further investigation to fully realize the potential of GenAI
in the networking sector. Furthermore, the paper presented a
practical use case involving traffic prediction and the applica-
tion of optimal policies for end-to-end network slicing using
a transformer, demonstrating the practical utility of GenAI in
improving network efficiency and performance. In the future,
we will evaluate the proposed policy generation mechanism
and different network slice parameters. We will also integrate
the solution with an emulated testbed using Mininet. We

7
0 20 40 60 80
2
1
0
1
2
3
TrueValue
Prediction
Fig. 9. Prediction of Informer Model on Network traffic for short duration
36-time steps
also plan to focus on extending the experimental scope of
the proposed framework by evaluating its performance across
different datasets and network topologies, including varying
demand matrices, interference conditions, and mobility pat-
terns representative of realistic B5G environments. The model
will be further enhanced to improve adaptability and gener-
alization across both short and long-term traffic prediction
tasks under dynamic network conditions. Additionally, we plan
to incorporate reinforcement learning–based policy adaptation
and automated hyperparameter optimization to enhance the
framework’s scalability, stability, and end-to-end decision pre-
dicting accuracy.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work is supported by the ZU ViP project EU2105 and
the ZU Provost’s Research Fellowship Award (PRFA) 23061.
