record_id: s2:21fbc9e43d0fc342eeb675118cb7cb5c11593d90
source_used: doi_landing_html
fetched_url: https://link.springer.com/article/10.1007/s10489-026-07386-9
fetched_title: A systematic evaluation of large language models for autonomous cyber defense
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:01:06Z

A systematic evaluation of large language models for autonomous cyber defense

Published: 28 July 2026

Volume 56, article number 367 (2026)

Cite this article

Save article

View saved research

Applied Intelligence

Aims and scope

Submit manuscript

Abstract

Large language models (LLMs) have general capabilities that make them promising candidates for autonomous cyber defense (ACD). However, their reliability remains uncertain, and a thorough comparison with traditional reinforcement learning (RL) approaches is lacking. This paper presents a systematic evaluation of LLM-based defense agents in the CybORG++ environment. We compare multiple models and prompting strategies against a specific pretrained Proximal Policy Optimization (PPO) reinforcement learning baseline across multiple adversaries and network topologies. We find that the best-performing LLM agents can outperform the RL baseline over long horizons. They also avoid false positives when only benign traffic is present. However, LLM agents show higher variance across runs than the RL agent. In addition, their performance is sensitive to prompt design, and the best results relative to the RL baseline are obtained with prompts that combine examples with explicit, manually specified strategy rules. In contrast, with zero-shot prompts, LLM effectiveness drops. Zero-shot results can be improved by adding memory via autoregressive prompting and, for some models, by including explicit action feedback, but they do not match the best few-shot rule-based prompts. With regard to generalization, although LLMs can be applied to new adversaries or network topologies without major prompt changes, this transfer is not reliable. Finally, all LLM agents show higher latency than the RL policy. Overall, our results show that LLMs can produce competitive defense policies without fine-tuning but require manually engineered prompts. Furthermore, their higher variance and slower response times could render them unsuitable for some real-world scenarios.

This is a preview of subscription content, log in via an institution

to check access.

Access this article

Log in via an institution

Subscribe and save

Springer+

from $39.99 /Month

Starting from 10 chapters or articles per month

Access and download chapters and articles from more than 300k books and 2,500 journals

Cancel anytime

View plans

Buy Now

Price excludes VAT (USA)

Tax calculation will be finalised during checkout.

Instant access to the full article PDF.

Institutional subscriptions

Fig. 1

Fig. 2

Fig. 3

Similar content being viewed by others

Securing LLM-based agents against cyberattacks: a comprehensive survey on attack techniques and defense strategies

Article
Open access
07 May 2026

Evaluating AI Agents for Cyber Defense: A Comparison of Deep Reinforcement Learning and LLM Approaches

Chapter

© 2026

LLM agents security duality: a comprehensive survey of self-security and empowered cybersecurity

Article
Open access
09 May 2026

Explore related subjects

Discover the latest articles, books and news in related subjects, suggested using machine learning.

Logic in AI

Formal Languages and Automata Theory

Artificial Intelligence

Computational Intelligence

Symbolic AI

Machine Learning

Legal Frameworks and Human Rights in Workplace Regulation

Notes

https://github.com/Orange-OpenSource/llm-acd-supplemental-material
