record_id: s2_snowball:6a28a2c2282c23e173cb3feefea27566eb2c6377
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2311.07635
fetched_title: PAST AS A GUIDE : L EVERAGING RETROSPECTIVE LEARNING FOR PYTHON CODE COMPLETION
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:01:04Z

PAST AS A GUIDE : L EVERAGING RETROSPECTIVE LEARNING
FOR PYTHON CODE COMPLETION
Seunggyoon Shin1,2, Seunggyu Chang2, Sungjoon Choi1
1 Korea University
2 NA VER Cloud
ABSTRACT
This work presents Past as a Guide (PaG), a simple approach for Large Language Models (LLMs)
to improve the coding capabilities by integrating the past history with interactive and iterative code
refinements. To be specific, inspired by human cognitive processes, the proposed method enables
LLMs to utilize previous programming and debugging experiences to enhance the Python code
completion tasks. The framework facilitates LLMs to iteratively refine the Python code based on
previous execution and debugging results and optimize learning and reasoning capabilities. The
proposed methodology achieved a 92% pass@1 on HumanEval, demonstrating the potential to
advance the field by leveraging retrospection from past experiences and interactive and iterative
refinement processes without external correctness indicators.
1 Introduction
Large Language Models (LLMs) play a pivotal role in advancing artificial intelligence research, exhibiting versatility
across various applications including coding interfaces and search mechanisms. This versatility is emphasized by
seminal works such as ReAct [ 21], SayCan [ 1], Toolformer [16], among others. Concurrently, leveraging code is
becoming a substantial medium for improving task performance, as illustrated by PAL [7] and Program of Thoughts [5].
Our study, "Past as a Guide(PaG)," aligns with these advancements, aiming to optimize LLM performance through the
integration of interactive and iterative code refinement from past retrospective guidance.
This mirrors a fundamental trait of human cognition: the intrinsic ability to harness past experiences. By adeptly
employing short-term and long-term memory encoding and retrieval, humans address complex reasoning tasks,
especially in areas like programming. Consider, for instance, the task of finding the last 100 digits of the n-th Fibonacci
number. Often, when confronted with such challenges, humans draw from their reservoir of past experiences. They
recall similar tasks, such as computing the n-th Fibonacci number, and intuitively gauge the similarities and differences
between the old and new challenges. This process demonstrates a synergy: humans use long-term memory retrieval to
construct retrospections from prior experiences and concurrently engage in short-term iterative refinements.
We conduct empirical evaluations to assess the performance of LLMs in harnessing retrospections, leading to a
significant achievement of 92% pass@1 at HumanEval. Instead of relying on direct external feedback on correctness,
we utilize the MBPP dataset [ 2] to construct a long-term memory for the LLMs. When faced with a problem from
HumanEval [4], the model retrieves and leverages similar problems from its MBPP experiences, effectively boosting its
performance. This method, combining interactive and iterative code refinements informed by past experiences, signifies
a pivotal advancement in LLM capabilities, indicating a promising trajectory for their future evolution.
2 Related work
2.1 Code Generation LLMs
There has been a surge of interest in generating code using LLMs. Notable advancements in this domain include the
methodologies proposed by Roziere et al. [15], Li et al. [11], Chen et al. [4], and another separate work by Li [11]. These
research pieces underscore the capability of LLMs to craft precise and functional code structures. Additionally, innova-
arXiv:2311.07635v1 [cs.SE] 13 Nov 2023

def fib():
a, b = 0, 1.
for _ in range(99):
a, b = b, (a + b) % 10**10
return a
Prior Experience
What is 55th fibo
What is cos(40)?
Draw Avocado chair
Current Experience
Calculate the last 10
digit of 100th fibo.
Retrospector
What is 55th fibo
Calculate the last 10
digit of 100th fibo.
Using prior Fibonacci calculations, I applied
modular arithmetic for efficient results.
Using prior Fibonacci
calculations, I applied
modular arithmetic for
efficient results.
4555169026
refine if needed
Calculate the last 10 digit of
100th fibo.
def fib():
a, b = 0, 1
for _ in range(100):
a, b = b, a + b
return a % 10**10
9261915075
def fib():
a, b = 0, 1
for _ in range(99):
a, b = b, a + b
return a % 10**10
4555169026
Past as a GuideInteractive and Interactive Reﬁnement
Figure 1: Left: Interactive and Iterative Code Refinement showcased through a process of repeated corrections.
Right: Retrieval of the most similar question, aligned with the Current instruction, sourced from the Past Experience.
By merging these insights, we form retrospections. The subsequent code generation follows an interactive and
iterative Code refinement process, emphasizing code execution and debugging.
tive techniques have emerged that harness models like ChatGPT or those that deploy self-instruction paradigms [20].
Such models are first primed to generate paired datasets of instructions and code, which are subsequently used to
fine-tune the LLMs [13, 9]. In a similar vein, Zhou et al. [23] leverage external knowledge through "DocPrompting" by
integrating code documentation for code generation. While this approach underscores the value of external references,
our approach uniquely focuses on leveraging the past experiences of LLMs to improve problem-solving in programming
tasks.
2.2 Code Execution LLMs
An alternative but equally compelling line of work exploits code not merely as an output but as a vital operative tool
for LLMs. For instance, the PAL [ 7] utilizes code execution results embedded within prompts to boost the model’s
proficiency in mathematical and numerical benchmarks. Moreover, the Binder approach [6] demonstrates that LLMs,
when equipped with SQL or Python execution capabilities, manifest a superior comprehension of tabular datasets.
Exploring the intersection of robotics and LLMs, the Code as Policies [ 12] postulates that LLMs can produce code,
serving as operational policies, to govern robotic actions fulfilling specific instructions. Furthermore, ViperGPT [18],
an innovative paradigm that synergizes vision foundation models with Python-executable code generated by GPT to
address vision-oriented tasks.
2.3 Self Improvement
Various studies have highlighted innovative approaches to enhance the programming performance of Language Learning
Models (LLMs). For instance, Haluptzok et al. [ 8] demonstrated that crafting programming puzzles and validating
solutions collaboratively can produce verified synthetic data. When LLMs are fine-tuned with this data, there’s a
marked improvement in their programming capabilities. On a different tangent, "Reflexion," as developed by Shinn
2

et al. [17], grants agents dynamic memory and the ability for self-reflection to improve reasoning abilities. Although
Reflexion employs a form of external memory, its application is constrained to scenarios involving identical instruction
sets. This methodology, while effective for repeated tasks, may not generalize well to varied problems that share
conceptual similarities but differ in specifics, as is common in real-world applications. Consequently, in our comparative
analysis, Reflexion is not categorized as using external memory in a broad sense, which we reserve for systems that
leverage past insights dynamically across distinct but conceptually related problems. In the realm of mathematics, Zhou
et al. [22] emphasize that prompts focused on verification, combined with voting techniques, can notably enhance
GPT-4’s performance in math-related benchmarks. Another intriguing approach is presented by Madaan et al. [14],
wherein the model iteratively refines its outputs leveraging self-generated feedback. "V oyager" by Wang et al. [19]
conceptualizes code as a skill. It recalls and incorporates skills acquired from prior tasks, thus sharpening its proficiency
in abstractions. In contrast to the above methodologies that often rely on external rewards or feedback, our proposed
PaG utilizes generated codes to rectify errors discerned from prior retrospections. Notably, our method constructs these
retrospections solely based on its own execution results, without the need for any external input or feedback.
Table 1: Comparison of LLM Enhancement Methodologies. *As discussed in [ 10], we do not classify receiving right
or wrong feedback from an oracle evaluator as oracle feedback; instead, we utilize tools to obtain intrinsic feedback.
Iterative Self Correction External Memory* No Oracle Feedback†
V oyager X ✓ ✓
Self-refine [14] ✓ X ✓
Reflexion [17] ✓ X* X
PaG (Ours) ✓ ✓ ✓
*External Memory is considered here as the ability to apply learned insights across varied but conceptually related problems.
Reflexion’s memory use is limited to identical instructions. †In the context of oracle feedback, we refer to the use of explicit
right/wrong evaluation from an oracle. Our approach utilizes intrinsic feedback mechanisms as delineated in [10].
3 Method
3.1 Interactive and Iterative Code Refinements
Overview: Consider an instruction I presented in natural language. To achieve the desired outcome based on this
instruction, we utilize a policy, denoted asπ. This policy, in the context of our work, is embodied by a Large Language
Model (LLM) denoted as LLM. The policyπ produces a verbal actionA which, in essence, is textual content. When the
content ofA contains a code segment, it can be systematically parsed and executed. The outcome of this execution is
subsequently appended toA. Engaging in this process iteratively allows for the comprehensive completion of the task
at hand. To explicate further, the actionA is comprised of a set, such that:
A ={(text, code, execution_result)}× # of trials
Here, each element of the setA represents a trial, constituting the text, the parsed code, and the result of executing that
code, whose collective enumeration accomplishes the instructed task.
Implementations: For our experiment, we employ the GPT4 API. It has been observed that several popular LLM
APIs, such as ChatGPT and GPT4, exhibit constraints when tasked with code generation. Primarily, many extant
LLM models are trained with safety mechanisms to prevent potential harm, as discussed by Bai et al. (2022) [ 3].
Consequently, when requests are made for operations like fetching data from ’yfinance’ or image manipulation tasks,
these models might assert their inability to execute them. Contrarily, they are indeed capable of producing the correct
code snippets necessary for task completion. To circumvent this limitation, we delineated the model’s role and its
execution capabilities within the SYSTEM_PROMPT section of ChatGPT. A comprehensive version of this prompt can be
found in Appendix A. Then, We utilized Python’s regex functionality to extract and filter out code blocks. If a code
segment is detected, it is executed using a Jupyter Notebook client. Subsequently, the resultant output from the code
segment is assimilated into the GPT4 trajectories.
3.2 Exploring stage
Memory Curation: In the exploration stage, each run of an LLM produces a tuple, denoted byt, and is mathematically
represented as:
t =⟨USER_INSTRUCTION, ASSISTANT_ANSWER⟩
3

This tuple,t, is then appended to a memory store, symbolized asM, in accordance with the following relation:
M←M∪{ t}
Here,M acts as a repository embodying the aggregate experiences or memories of the LLM. Each element withinM is
a unique tuple comprising a user instruction and the corresponding assistant response. The incorporation of new tuples
intoM signifies the LLM’s process of updating its knowledge base, learning, and adapting through each run. For the
purpose of this paper, we leverage the initial subset of MBPP [ 2], consisting of the first 470 examples, to formulate the
M
3.3 Past as a Guide
PaG concentrates on utilizing experienced memoriesM to proficiently formulate an action,A, capable of fulfilling a
provided instruction,I. This method unfolds systematically through several interconnected steps.
Initially, an instruction,I, instigates a search within our structured memory storeM. To facilitate this, we calculate
embeddings forI and each instruction inM using OpenAI’s text-embedding-ada-002 model and employ cosine
similarity as the metric to quantify resemblance between the instruction embeddings, thereby extracting the most
analogous instruction fromM.
Isimilar = argmax
I ′∈M
Similarity(I,I ′) (1)
When a similar instruction is identified, we use its corresponding action trajectories, A, together with the original
instruction,I, to query the LLM. This query is designed to derive retrospections, denoted as R. It emphasizes the
extraction and application of knowledge from past experiences to the present context.
R = LLM (“How can prior experience "Asimilar" be applied to solve "I"?”) (2)
After the acquisition of retrospections,R, they are seamlessly integrated as a prefix to the initial instruction,I, enriching
the instruction base to generate the refined action,A, targeting the accomplishment of the outlined task in the initial
instruction.
A = LLM(R +I) (3)
PaG utilizes knowledge from previous interactions stored inM. This knowledge helps refine the model’s responses
to new instructions, placing retrospection of past experiences in the context of new situations. As a result, the model
becomes more effective in completing tasks.
For a more detailed, practical illustration of our method refer to Appendix B.
4 Code Completion Experiments
Task: The task is derived from HumanEval [4], where the objective is to complete a provided Python code skeleton.
This task presented a natural language description along with an incomplete Python code snippet. The completed code
is then verified for correctness by executing the associated test code, which either yields a pass or fail outcome based on
the code’s accuracy and efficacy. The primary goal is to successfully fulfill the requirements delineated in the natural
language description by augmenting the Python skeleton to create a functional and correct code piece.
Results: In our experiments, we assess the effectiveness of our proposed methods against baseline models. The
following table 2. 2 summarizes the performances of the different approaches:
PaG achieved state-of-the-art performance, a commendable feat realized without relying on external correctness
feedback from the test code. Our approach uniquely combines retrospective guidance from past experiences with an
interactive and iterative code refinements loop driven by code execution. This emphasizes the dual strengths of our
method: harnessing past experiences for informed guidance and using interactive refinements for precision. Both factors
collectively enhance the model’s performance, showcasing the potential of integrating experienced knowledge with
dynamic refinements without the need for external correctness indicators.
The actions generated by the Large Language Model, denoted asA, include numerous code blocks, each undergoing
multiple trials. Every block withinA is subjected to a comprehensive examination against corresponding test cases.
4

Method % Pass@1
GPT-4 67.00
GPT-4 + † (max 6 tries) 84.15
GPT-4 + † (max 12 tries) 90.85
Reflexion [17] 91.00
GPT-4 + † (max 12 tries) + PaG 92.07
Table 2: Performance comparison of different methods, with our method highlighted. The symbol † represents
’Interactive and Iterative Code Refinement’.
However, due to the possibility of discrepancies arising during intermediate executions of the solution function, an
erroneous ’fail’ flag may be prompted even if the final solution is accurate. To counteract this, we employ a refinement
procedure, using regular expressions to meticulously filter and eliminate all print and assert statements within the
generated code blocks. Any cases initially identified as failures undergo a re-assessment phase, wherein the accurate
code block is extracted from the ensemble withinA and subjected to a secondary evaluation.
5 Conclusion and Limitation
This work has developed a methodology that, akin to human learning, utilizes prior experiences and retrospection to
enhance performance from the initiation phase through the reasoning stages, employing a multi-attempt code interpreter.
Our proposed method, PaG, integrates past experiences with current instructions to craft retrospections. Further, it
employs interactive and iterative code refinements through execution. By drawing on past lessons, PaG attained a
92% performance on the HumanEval benchmark. However, the current scope of this methodology is largely confined
to programming-centric tasks, similar to those in HumanEval, presenting a limitation in its applicability to more
language-intensive tasks. As a prospective avenue for future research, the exploration of incorporating online learning
to augment retrospections is promising, potentially allowing models to mirror the continual learning and adaptability
inherent in human cognition and addressing a broader array of tasks with increased efficacy and precision.
