record_id: s2_snowball:0ea594436ddb51456ebccf2291d49440003c6dcf
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.03352
fetched_title: Perfect score on IPhO 2025 theory by Gemini agent
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:16Z

Perfect score on IPhO 2025 theory by Gemini agent ∗
Yichen Huang (黄溢辰)
Santa Clarita, California 91350, USA
huangtbcmh@gmail.com
March 5, 2026
Abstract
The International Physics Olympiad (IPhO) is the world’s most prestigious and
renowned physics competition for pre-university students. IPhO problems require com-
plex reasoning based on deep understanding of physical principles in a standard general
physics curriculum. On IPhO 2025 theory problems, while gold medal performance by
AI models was reported previously, it falls behind the best human contestant. Here we
build a simple agent with Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview. We run it five times and it achieved
a perfect score every time. However, data contamination could occur because Gemini
3.1 Pro Preview was released after the competition.
1 Introduction
The International Physics Olympiad (IPhO) is the world’s most prestigious and renowned
physics competition for pre-university students. Established in Poland in 1967 with just five
participating countries, it has since been held annually and expanded to include over 100
nations, each represented by a team of up to five of their best pre-university students. The
competition is a test of both broad physical skills and sustained concentration: over two
consecutive days, contestants are given two 5-hour sessions to solve theoretical and exper-
imental problems, respectively. The problems are drawn from a standard general physics
curriculum. The curriculum is for freshman undergraduate students majoring in physics and
covers the fields of mechanics, electromagnetism (including optics), thermodynamics, and
special relativity.
Qualifying for the IPhO is extremely challenging. In the United States, a student must
advance through a series of national competitions of increasing difficulty, from theF=ma
exam to the USA Physics Olympiad (USAPhO). Top performers at USAPhO are invited to
compete for the five spots on the U.S. national team. Most other countries have similarly
stringent selection processes in order to find their best pre-university students to represent
the country. A gold medal at the IPhO is an extraordinary achievement, awarded to only
∗Project repository:https://github.com/yichenhuang/IPhO2025
1
arXiv:2603.03352v1 [physics.ed-ph] 26 Feb 2026

Table 1: Gold-medal but unsaturated performance on the international Olympiad of various
disciplines in 2025. For IMO 2025, we only cite the first batch of announcements made soon
after the event. For IPhO and IChO, only theoretical problems are evaluated. The numbers
in smaller fonts are obtained by evaluating solutions with LLM and may not be accurate.
event accuracies
International Mathematical Olympiad (IMO) 83.3% [5–8]
International Physics Olympiad (IPhO) 78.3% [9],75.7%[10],71.7%[11],77.3%[12],
72.7%, 84%[13],87.7%[14], 100% [this work]
International Chemistry Olympiad (IChO) 75.4%[15],82.8%[14]
International Olympiad in Informatics (IOI) 74.4% [16], 88.9% [17]
International Olympiad on 85.6% (theory), 88.5% (data analysis)
Astronomy and Astrophysics (IOAA) [18]
the top one-twelfth of the contestants. Thus, it deserves to be permanently highlighted on
the curriculum vitae.
Advanced reasoning capability is a core form of intelligence. Consequently, automated
reasoning has become a major frontier of artificial intelligence (AI). A lot of effort is de-
voted to improving the reasoning capability of AI models, especially large language models
(LLM). The progress is so fast that we have to evaluate the models on benchmarks of increas-
ing difficulty. “Easier” mathematical and scientific datasets like the American Invitational
Mathematics Examination (AIME), GPQA [1] have already been almost saturated by the
state-of-the-art models. The next tier is Olympiad-level problems, which require correct final
answers supported by sound scientific arguments. For almost every discipline, gold-medal
but unsaturated performance on the corresponding international Olympiad in 2025 has been
reported; see Table 1. AI models can even sometimes solve research-level problems [2–4].
While there are more people working on AI for mathematics, physics is also an important
and the most fundamental discipline of natural science. Mastering IPhO problems is one
step towards making AI more useful in physics. In this paper, we build a simple agent
powered by Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview. The agent synthesizes solutions from parallel thinking
[19] (analogous to Gemini 2.5 Deep Think [20] and Grok 4 Heavy) and contains a component
that may use Python code to make measurements on figures [21]. We run the agent 5 times
on IPhO 2025 theory problems. It achieved full scores every time. To our knowledge, this is
the first time perfect performance is observed in an international Olympiad event.
Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview was released after IPhO 2025. Thus, IPhO 2025 problems could
occur in the training dataset of the model, and the perfect performance by our Gemini
agent should be interpreted with caution. However, it should be clear that our result is
still meaningful. The second highest reported result 87.7% was achieved by Gemini 3 Deep
Think [14]. In the release note [22], the Gemini team indicates that Gemini 3.1 Pro is the
“upgraded core intelligence that makes [the Gemini 3 Deep Think] breakthroughs possible.”
Thus, the risk of data contamination for Gemini 3 Deep Think is at the same level as that
for our agent built on Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview.
The repository (https://github.com/yichenhuang/IPhO2025) of this paper contains
•problem statements (PDF documents) downloaded from the official website and their
2

pre-processed and corrected version to be fed into the agent;
•official solutions and marking schemes;
•code of our agent, with all prompts;
•five solutions of each problem generated by the agent.
2 Related work
The IPhO 2025 theoretical exam has three problems. Each is worth 10 points so that the full
score is 30. Each problem is divided into 3 to 4 parts, and each part has 3 to 5 sub-problems.
There are already many evaluations of LLM on IPhO 2025 in the literature. All results
below are reported by the raw points (out of 30) rather than the accuracies in percentages.
Qiu et al. [9], where the second named author is an IPhO gold medalist, used Gemini 2.5
Pro only. The model alone achieved 21.4 points. They also built the agent “Physics Super-
nova” using smolagents, which is an implementation of ReAct [23]. The agent achieved 23.5
points. It can be applied broadly to other problems because the ReAct framework is general
(not tailored to physics). This reference stands out because it uses human evaluation. (All
other results on IPhO 2025 discussed in this section are obtained by automatic evaluation.)
References [10–13] have largely overlapping sets of authors. HiPhO [10] is mostly a
dataset paper but evaluated a broad set of models on various physics Olympiads. On IPhO
2025, the best result is 22.7 points by Gemini 2.5 Pro. Reference [11] built the agent “Physic-
sMinions.” Powered by Gemini 2.5 Flash, it achieved 21.5 points. P1 [12] is an open weight
model trained from Qwen3. P1-235B-A22B achieved 21.2 points alone and 23.2 points with
PhysicsMinions. Note that P1 is a purely textual model. For IPhO problems that contain
figures, it can only make an educated guess of the problem setup or give up. Finally, P1-
VL [13] is an open weight model trained from Qwen3-VL. P1-VL-235B-A22B achieved 21.0
points alone and 22.1 points with PhysicsMinions. While P1-VL has visual capabilities, its
performance on IPhO 2025 is worse than that of P1. We suspect that this is because the
figures in IPhO 2025 problems are too challenging to understand visually. Misunderstanding
figures might hurt the model’s performance.
This line of work [10–13] uses Gemini 2.5 Flash to automatically grade the solutions
generated by various models. The evaluator is given the official marking scheme. The
final score for each sub-problem is the greater of the answer-level score and the step-level
score. Thus, a solution with a correct final answer always receives full credit while that with
an incorrect answer is graded by the number of correct intermediate steps. This grading
convention leads to inflated scores if the phenomenon of correct answers with incorrect
reasoning occurs. This phenomenon occurs frequently in LLM for mathematics [24] and could
also occur when applying LLM to physics. While being good at grading final answers, even
the state-of-the-art LLM cannot accurately grade the intermediate reasoning in a solution to
a technically challenging problem, even if the official marking scheme is given [25]. Indeed,
Table 7 in Ref. [10] presents a comparative study, which shows that Gemini 2.5 Flash cannot
accurately reflect human grading. In our opinion, automatic evaluation by LLM definitely
correlates positively with human grading, but human grading is needed for accurate results.
3

In a very recent evaluation, Gemini 3 Deep Think achieved 26.3 points, where answer
correctness was graded with reference to canonical solutions using Gemini as a judge [14].
Reference [26] claimed nearly perfect performance on Chinese Physics Olympiad theory
problems by an agent built from Gemini 2.5 Pro.
3 Dataset
3.1 Data collection and pre-processing
We downloaded the problem statements (PDF documents) from the official website (https:
//www.ipho2025.fr/official-questions-ipho-france-2025). Since there is no guaran-
tee that the website will be permanently accessible or that the PDFs for problem statements
will not be silently updated, we include a copy of the three PDFs in our project repository
for archival purposes.
Unlike IMO problems which are usually one or two short paragraphs of text, IPhO
problems are long and multimodal: The three IPhO 2025 problems have an average of about
5 pages and 5 figures. There is some freedom in how to input the problem statements to a
model or an agent, and the final accuracy depends on the input format. Thus, we believe
that it is important to be fully transparent on how we pre-processed the dataset because
pre-processing may significantly affect the final score. The most convenient way is to directly
feed in the PDF files (i.e., no pre-processing), and the model would use OCR to automatically
extract the text and figures. This approach is bad because OCR frequently makes errors,
which downgrade the final performance. We should manually convert the PDFs in order to
reduce the possibility that the problem statement is misunderstood. However, we must not
edit the semantics or even accidentally provide any hint during pre-processing.
We manually extracted the text and, following Ref. [9], converted it into markdown format
(i.e., saved into an md file). We also added the mark “—” to separate the sub-problems.
These marks make it easy for the code to parse the sub-problems when reading the md file.
They are not fed into the model.
We extracted the figures by first converting the PDF into a high-quality png and then
cropping the png. Some figures in the PDF are vector graphs, whose resolution can in
principle be made arbitrarily high, but the resolution of raster graphs is capped.
Certain figures in the PDF have large background area. For humans, it is very clear that
background is meaningless. However, Gemini spends a fixed number of tokens representing a
figure. Background area consumes tokens and thus there are fewer “useful” tokens describing
the key elements in the figure. To reduce this token loss because of the background, we crop
the figure by taking the minimum region (with reasonable margins) that contains the object
or system of interest. Indeed, focusing on the area of interest by cropping out irrelevant
regions is a well-known pre-processing technique to improve image understanding. 1
Problem 3 has 6 figures. Each of the first three has one panel and each of the last three
has two panels. The two panels in the same figure are not closely related to each other.
They form a single figure so that they can be placed side by side on a page in order to reduce
the white space to their left and right. We split the two-panel figures into, e.g., Fig. 4A
1I thank Pengchuan Zhang for pointing this out.
4

and Fig. 4B. After the splitting, each figure has a unique ID, which is either a pure number
or a number followed by A or B. The existence of a letter in the ID means that the figure
was a panel in a two-panel figure. We also split all two-panel figures in Problems 1 and 2.
Since Gemini spends a fixed number of tokens per figure, splitting a two-panel figure into
two doubles the total number of tokens for the same visual content. This may potentially
improve the accuracy of image understanding.
While we described our figure pre-processing as cropping and splitting, in practice, all
we did is taking snapshots of the PDF for problem statements. Cropping means taking a
snapshot with a smaller rectangular bounding box, and splitting means taking two snapshots
(one for each panel) on a two-panel figure. When figures in a dataset are obtained by taking
snapshots, the dataset preparer has to define a rule for constructing bounding boxes. We
believe that any reasonable rule is acceptable as long as it is consistently applied and does
not edit the content of any figure.
After extracting the figures in the PDF into png files, we inserted them into the textual
md file. The official Gemini documentation by Google recommends that figures be placed
before the textual descriptions of them. Thus, we put the figure files immediately before the
paragraph (in the md file) that first mentions the figure.
Each IPhO problem also has an answer sheet as a standalone PDF file, which may
contain figures and/or tables. Sometimes the problem statement refers to the answer sheet.
For example, Sub-problem A.2 in Problem 2 reads “..., complete the table in the answer
sheet to ...” In this case, we have to incorporate the table into the problem statement
because otherwise the problem statement is not self-contained so that the model would not
know what to do. We also manually added a small piece of text “The table on the answer
sheet to be completed:” to clarify that the table is from the answer sheet. If the problem
statement refers to the answer sheet but is already complete without the answer sheet, we
do not incorporate tables or figures from the answer sheet, e.g., Sub-Problem B.1 in Problem
2. Thus, we made minimal edits to the problem statement because of the answer sheet.
The above is the full description of how we pre-processed the dataset. We have not done
ablation study on to what extent or even whether each of the pre-processing operations
affects the final accuracy. With all pre-processing, our agent can achieve perfect scores.
Missing a single pre-processing operation would not crush the performance of the agent. It
could at most slightly reduce the accuracy, and the effect (if any) can only be observed by
sampling a large number of solutions using the agent. This is not only expensive but also
requires a lot of human labor because we have to use human grading for accurate evaluation.
As of February 2026, the official solutions or marking schemes are still not available on
the official website, but they appear athttps://ipho.olimpicos.net. References [9, 10]
used the official solutions and marking schemes on this unofficial website. We also use them.
3.2 Curation
We must make sure that the dataset is completely error-free before using it. To this end, we
used Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview to review the problem statements and official solutions. It found
a few errors, which are really errors upon our human evaluation. This subsection explains
each error and how we have edited the problem statement or marking scheme accordingly.
All our experiments were run and evaluated on the corrected dataset. Surprisingly, we do
5

Figure 1: Left panel: Fig. 1(B) in Problem 1; Right panel: Fig. 2 in Problem 1.
not find any of these errors being pointed out publicly on the Internet or in previous works
listed in the IPhO row of Table 1. Catching these errors is the physics contribution of this
work. The resulting corrected dataset with the pre-processing described in the preceding
subsection is available in our project repository. It facilitates future testing of other models
on corrected IPhO 2025 problems.
As LLMs become stronger in reasoning, they are evaluated on increasingly more advanced
problems. The errors we found show the importance of having a domain expert overseeing
the evaluation.
3.2.1 Fig. 1(B) in Problem 1
Part B of Problem 1 considers a spherical galaxy whose mass distribution is spherically
symmetric around the galactic center. Sub-problem B.2 further assumes the following:
Assumption 1.The mass distribution is roughly homogeneous in a central region named
the bulge, and there is almost no mass outside the bulge.
The red curve in Fig. 1(B) in Problem 1 (see Fig. 1, left panel) predicts the speedv c of an
object with a perfect circular orbit as a function of the distancerto the galactic center. The
sub-problem asks to deduce the massM b of the bulge by reading values on the red curve.
The official solution correctly finds thatv c(r) =
q
GMb/rforr > r b, whereGis the
gravitational constant, andr b is the radius of the bulge. It is not explicitly stated but
follows from Assumption 1 thatr b corresponds to the peak of the red curve. However, the
red curve on the right of the peak cannot be fitted byC/ √rfor some constantC; it decays
faster than 1/√rasrincreases. This is a fundamental physics error (not just an inaccuracy)
because in any spherical galaxy (possibly violating Assumption 1), the fact that mass cannot
be negative impliesv c(r1)√r1≤v c(r2)√r2 for any 0< r 1 < r2. A proof of this inequality
can be obtained by querying Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview.
A contestant is supposed to read a data point from the red curve and numerically calculate
Mb =v 2
cr/G.(1)
6

Line B.2.5 in the official marking scheme estimates thatM b≃9×10 8M⊙ and explicitly
allows a tolerance of±25% for the numerical value ofM b. The contestant can choose anyr
on the right of the peak. Because of the aforementioned error, differentrleads to different
results. If the chosenris small, the calculatedM b is larger than 125%×9×10 8M⊙, even if
the reading of the data point is accurate.
For this error, we do not modify the problem statement or Fig. 1(B), but modify the
marking scheme as follows. For Line B.2.4, the contestant can choose any data point on the
right of the peak. For Line B.2.5, full points (0.1) are awarded as long as the relative error
with respect to the value ofM b calculated using the precise reading of the chosen data point
is≤25%. This revised marking scheme still requires the contestant to read the data point
relatively accurately and apply the correct formula (1).
3.2.2 Fig. 3 in Problem 1
Figure 2 in Problem 1 (see Fig. 1, right panel) gives the correct geometry of the measurement.
The derivation in the official solution to Sub-problem C.3 yields the correct relationship
vrE/S =v⊙(R⊙/R−1) sinℓ.(2)
Here,v rE/S is the relative velocity of the emitter with respect to the sun in the direction of
sight;v⊙ is the speed of the sun in its orbit around the centerCof the Milky Way;R ⊙ is the
distance from the sun toC;Ris the distance from the emitter toC;ℓ= 30 ◦ is the galactic
longitude.
Figure 2 in Problem 1 clearly showsR < R ⊙ so thatv rE/S >0. Positivev rE/S means
that the emitter is moving away from the sun. This leads to redshift (frequency becomes
smaller). However, all three peaks in Fig. 3 in Problem 1 have blueshiftf−f 0 >0, where
fandf 0 are the observed and original frequencies, respectively. Thus, Figs. 2 and 3 in
Problem 1 contradict each other. 2
To fix this error, we manually change the horizontal axis in Fig. 3 of Problem 1 from
f−f 0 tof 0−f. Line C4.1 in the marking scheme is changed tov r,i =−c∆f i/f0. No further
changes to the problem statement or official solution are necessary. Note that the official
solution to Sub-problem C.5 also depictsR<R ⊙, yielding redshift.
3.2.3 Sub-problem B.3 in Problem 3
The statement of this sub-problem does not contain any error, but there is a miscalculation
in the official solution. Line B.3.5 reads
h= 2σ
ρℓv2
f
= 3t2
b
2a4
vuut σ3
ρ3
ℓg0
.(3)
The first equality is correct (quoted from Line B.1.6) but the second is not. Line B.3.4 gives
vf = rc
tb
andr c = 2√
3a2
qρℓg0
σ . Correct calculation yields
h= 2σ
ρℓv2
f
= 2σt2
b
ρℓr2
c
= 3σ2t2
b
2a4ρ2
ℓg0
.(4)
2I thank Lin F. Yang for independently confirming this error.
7

The numerical value ofhin Line B.3.6 is calculated using the correct formula and is correct.
For this error, we do not modify the problem statement or the marking scheme, but use
the correct formula (4) in human evaluation.
4 Agent
Problem 2 in IPhO 2025 does not require making measurements on figures but Problems 1
and 3 do. We describe our agent for Problem 2 in Subsection 4.1. Then, we describe the
component for making measurements and how to incorporate it into the agent in Subsection
4.2. The code for our agent is available in our project repository.
Each IPhO problem has many sub-problems, which largely form a logical progression. A
sub-problem may depend on the solutions to some of the previous sub-problems. To use an
LLM (not an agent) to solve a problem, the most natural scheme is to have a multi-round
conversation. The system instruction describes the task as solving an IPhO problem. Then,
the user inputs the sub-problem statements one by one. When solving each sub-problem,
the model can refer to all preceding context including its own solutions to previous sub-
problems. More specifically, we index the sub-problems by natural numbers starting from 1.
At turnnof the conversation, the user’s message is the statementq n of Sub-problemn, and
the model’s responsea n is the solution of the sub-problem. Thus, we have the sequence
q1,a 1,q 2,a 2,q 3,...,q n−1,an−1,qn,an,...(5)
This scheme makes the maximum use of the context and best mimics how a human
contestant would tackle the problem. However, if the model makes even a minor error in an
early sub-problem, the error may be severely penalized because it provides misleading context
for all subsequent sub-problems. Thus, the sample-to-sample fluctuation of the accuracies
may be large. One has to run the model a sufficient number of times for a precise estimation
of the expected accuracy and the variance.
4.1 Agent for Problem 2
Our agent for Problem 2 works as follows. LetH m be the dialogue history consisting of the
firstmmessages in the sequence (5) such that the sequence can be written asH 2n−2,qn,an,...
orH 2n−1,an,.... We independently generate four raw solutionsa (1)
n ,a (2)
n ,a (3)
n ,a (4)
n to Sub-
problemnfrom the contextH 2n−1. Then, we synthesizea (1)
n anda (2)
n such thata (5)
n is the
output ofH 2n−2,qn +a (1)
n +a (2)
n +[synthesis prompt], where the plus sign denotes concate-
nation. The synthesis prompt asks the model to review the two provided solutions, identify
errors (if any) in them, and construct a correct solution. Similarly, we synthesizea (3)
n and
a(4)
n intoa (6)
n , and synthesizea (5)
n anda (6)
n intoa n. Then, we move on to the next sub-problem
with the new contextH 2n = (H2n−1,an).
It should be clear that we are just using the standard idea of synthesizing solutions from
parallel thinking [19] (analogous to Gemini 2.5 Deep Think [20] and Grok 4 Heavy). While
this idea is usually advertised as exploring diverse solution paths, here its main functionality
is error correction. LLM can make mistakes. Then, identifying the incorrect solution between
two conflicting solutions is easier than determining whether a given solution is incorrect.
8

Our agent for Problem 2 generates four raw solutions per sub-problem and synthesizes
them in two rounds. A lighter agent that only synthesizes two raw solutions per sub-problem
would perform worse but still reasonably well, at less than half the cost. We estimate that
the probability of the light agent achieving a perfect score on Problem 2 is about 90%, but
have not gathered sufficient data to justify this estimate.
In either agent for Problem 2, we disable the code execution tool because Gemini 3.1 Pro
Preview can perform numerical calculations reliably.
4.2 Agent for Problems 1 and 3
Some sub-problems in Problems 1 and 3 require making accurate measurements on figures.
However, Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview’s native vision is not good at this task and can only make
accurate measurements sometimes. Indeed, measuring with LLM is analogous to a human
making measurements by eyeballing a figure. A human needs a ruler or other tools to achieve
high measurement accuracy. Similarly, given the code execution tool, LLM can accurately
measure distances on figures in pixels by writing a Python script [21] using standard computer
vision (for object detection) and data processing libraries. For Gemini 3 Flash and later
models, this capability is known as agentic vision [27].
The component for making measurements can be constructed and incorporated into our
agent as follows. Suppose we have already solved the firstn−1 sub-problems. Disabling
Python, we first generate a solutiona ′
n to Sub-problemnfrom the contextH 2n−1. Then, we
send inH 2n−1,a′
n,[measurement detection prompt]. The detection prompt asks the model to
detect whether any measurement is made ina ′
n, and restricts the output of the model to be
either (1) “yes,” followed by a statement describing what quantities are measured on which
figure in the solutiona ′
n or (2) “no.” In the latter case, leta n =a′
n, and we directly move
on to the next sub-problem with the new contextH 2n = (H2n−1,an).
In the “yes” case, we call the measurement component, which is a standalone single-round
conversation with Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview. The user’s message (input) is the figure and the
descriptions of the quantities to measure. The model’s response (output) is the measurement
results. While agentic vision (with Python) usually gives more accurate results than native
vision (without Python), there are special cases where native vision is better. For example,
when a data point exactly locates at a grid point, native vision can read the intended
value without error while agentic vision may introduce an artificial error of, say, 1%. Thus,
the model has to decide whether or not to use agentic vision and makes the measurement
accordingly. Only within the measurement component the model may use Python.
We observe that the measurement component can make mistakes with small probability.
For example, the object detector may identify an incorrect object so that the result is not
even close to the ground truth. To make measurements more robustly, we measure the same
quantity three times and take the median (not average).
Leta n be the output ofH 2n−1,a′
n,[update prompt]+[new measurement results]. The
update prompt simply asks the model to rewrite the solutiona ′
n using the new measurement
results obtained from the measurement component. We move on to the next sub-problem
with the new contextH 2n = (H2n−1,an).
9

4.3 Discussions
Both synthesizing solutions from parallel thinking and making measurements with Python
code are standard ideas. Our contribution is to find the combination of methods that leads
to perfect performance on IPhO 2025 theory problems. This result is beyond all previously
reported ones. Since one does not expect that a universal agent leads to best results in all
domains, designing domain-specific agents is a nontrivial task that pushes the frontiers of the
capability of AI in a domain. The task also requires a deep understanding of the strengths
and weaknesses of AI models in the domain.
An agent is a combination of a base model and an agentic workflow. If the base model
is not strong enough (e.g., misunderstands a physical principle required to solve a problem),
then the agent cannot achieve a perfect score regardless of how the workflow is designed.
Otherwise, the stronger the base model is, the less test-time compute and simpler the work-
flow can be. Our agent only uses parallel thinking (and agentic vision) because Gemini 3.1
Pro Preview is a very strong model. Other base models may also be able to achieve a perfect
score with a more sophisticated workflow that possibly contains the following techniques.
Consensus [28] and verification-and-refinement are two standard inference-time methods.
The former is very effective in boosting the probability of solving a problem towards 1 if
the problem can be solved with probability greater than 1/2. The latter can substantially
improve the capability of solving IMO problems [7] and has already been implemented in
earlier works [9, 11] on building agents for IPhO.
5 Evaluation
5.1 Settings
Throughout this work, we use Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview with the default thinking level “high”
and the default temperature 1 (the latter is strongly recommended by official Gemini doc-
uments for reasoning tasks). We use ultra high media resolution. Each image in ultra high
resolution consumes about 2240 tokens. Since some words in physics (e.g., “force”) could
be misinterpreted as violence, we turn off all safety settings. We use Files API for inputting
figures to the model and disable web search.
Gemini 3 models have the feature “thought signature,” which is an encrypted representa-
tion of the model’s internal thought process (chain of thought). Official Gemini documents
strongly recommend turning on thought signatures in a multi-round conversation so that
when generating later responses the model can attend to not only earlier responses but also
its previous internal thinking. However, in an agentic workflow individual turns in a conver-
sation can be deleted, replaced, or modified. Thought signatures might break the coherence
of the conversation because they could refer to a deleted or replaced turn. Hence, we turn
thought signatures off in our agent.
For Problem 2, we use the agent that generates four raw solutions per sub-problem and
without the measurement component. For Problems 1 and 3, we use the agent that generates
two raw solutions per sub-problem and with the measurement component. We could use the
same agent (four raw solutions and with the measurement component) for all three problems.
We make different choices for different problems only in order to save inference time and
10

cost. This is not overfitting. Problems 1 and 3 are relatively easy so that two raw solutions
suffice, but four raw solutions do not worsen the performance.
5.2 Grading
Throughout this work, we use human evaluation, which takes quite a bit of labor.
Some sub-problems (C.5 in Problem 1 and B.1, C.3 in Problem 2) require drawing graphs
or diagrams. Since the output of Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview is text only, we added a system
instruction requiring a mathematically precise textual description of how to draw the figure.
The points for drawing are awarded if a student can unambiguously reconstruct the intended
figure from the textual description.
IPhO marking schemes usually divide a solution into many small steps and assign partial
points to each of them. This is nice to contestants because incremental progress is credited.
However, sometimes essentially correct solutions skip one or more minor steps. We added a
system instruction requiring maximally detailed presentation. This instruction significantly
reduces the frequency of but cannot completely remove the phenomenon of step skipping. In
our human evaluation, a solution is not penalized if the step it skips is minor to the extent
that it is easy to fill by an expert. The implementation of this criterion is a bit subjective,
but we expect that most physics professors would not penalize any of the five solutions
generated by our agent for each problem.
For some sub-problems, the agent’s method is very different from the official solution.
In this case, full points are awarded as long as an expert can verify the correctness of the
agent’s solution without needing to fill in any gaps.
The agent is only required to solve tasks explicitly stated in a sub-problem. For example,
Sub-problem D.4 in Problem 1 reads
Considering relevant cases, determinevc(r) for all values ofrin the MOND theory
in the case of a gravitational field due to a homogeneously distributed massM
with radiusR b.
This sub-problem is worth 0.9 points. It should be clear that the sub-problem statement
only requires derivingv c as a function ofr. However, the marking scheme assigns 0.1 points
for calculating the asymptotic behavior ofv c(r) asr→∞and another 0.1 points for the
behavior ofv c(r) asr→0. All five solutions of our agent correctly derivev c(r) for all values
ofr, but do not always calculate the asymptotic behaviors. We do not penalize the solutions
because calculating the asymptotic behaviors ofv c(r) is not required by the sub-problem
statement.
5.3 Results
We run our agent five times on each problem. All solutions of our agent are available in our
project repository. Upon human evaluation, we found that every solution achieves a perfect
score. While there are no errors in the final solutions, there are errors in the raw solutions
from which the final solution is synthesized. In this subsection, we discuss these “hidden”
errors that have all been corrected by our agentic workflow, but they prevent Gemini 3.1
Pro Preview from directly achieving a perfect score robustly.
11

We occasionally observed that Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview lost a constant pre-factor when
copying a result from its own solution of a previous sub-problem, yielding a wrong final result
for the current sub-problem. However, when synthesizing with a correct solution it is easy for
the model to find the error. This type of error is so rare that we only observed once. While
LLMs have been more and more reliable in algebraic manipulation, it is understandable that
they occasionally make trivial mistakes because they are inherently random.
There are two related errors that appear much more often. We run our agent 5 times
on Problem 2. In each run, 4 raw solutions were generated for each sub-problem. Thus, we
have a total of 20 raw solutions for each sub-problem. All of them are generated conditioned
on correct solutions to all previous sub-problems (because all final solutions achieve perfect
scores). For both Sub-problems C.2 and C.3, 5 out of the 20 raw solutions are wrong.
The correct final result of Sub-problem C.2 is
⃗T≃ 4SbSc
Sb +Sc
ρgX⃗ ux.(6)
Here, ⃗Tis the tension force on a mass;Xis the displacement of the mass in the direction
of the unit vector⃗ ux; all other symbols are constants. ⃗Tis a destabilizing force and drives
the mass away from the origin. In all 5 wrong raw solutions to C.2, the result has an extra
minus sign so that the force becomes stabilizing and drives the mass to the origin. This
fundamentally changes the physics and would be severely penalized if not corrected during
the synthesizing process.
C.3 depends on C.2. The first step to solve C.3 is to copy the final result of C.2. In all 5
wrong raw solutions to C.3 (obtained conditioned on a correct solution to C.2 with the final
result (6)), the copying process introduces an additional minus sign.
We suspect that such errors are a consequence of improper reinforcement learning when
training Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview. In physics problems, when a force is linear in the dis-
placement, the coefficient is usually negative (like a spring) causing harmonic oscillation.
Maybe the model has seen this pattern too many times and thus tries to add a minus sign.
Fortunately, when synthesizing two solutions with correct and incorrect signs, respectively,
we observed that the model always produces a new solution with the correct sign.
6 Data contamination
Data contamination occurs when test data are intentionally or unconsciously included in a
model’s training data, inflating the model’s apparent performance. Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview
was released on February 19, 2026 with the knowledge cutoff January 2025, while the IPhO
2025 theoretical examination was held on July 21, 2025.
Some people might argue that because the exam date is after the knowledge cutoff, there
is no data contamination. In our opinion, this is too optimistic. Knowledge cutoff is usually a
consequence of pre-training data preparation. Training an LLM has two stages: pre-training
and post-training. The former consumes an enormous amount of data (e.g., all web text)
while the latter makes the model smarter by reinforcement learning on high-quality reasoning
data. Since pre-training is very expensive because of its data size, it is common practice that
multiple released models are post-trained on the same pre-trained model. While there is no
12

public definition of knowledge cutoff, most people tend to believe that it refers to the last
day of collecting data for the pre-training dataset. Thus, it is not unethical to include data
after knowledge cutoff in the post-training dataset, and the risk of data contamination exists
as long as the test dataset is released before the model.
LLMs are developing very fast, and new model versions drop every a few months. Upon
model release, it is impractical to wait until the appearance of a fresh set of contamination-
free datasets to evaluate it. Model release is usually accompanied with a set of benchmark
results on well-known datasets that are previously public. All these evaluation results suffer
from the risk of data contamination in a similar sense as our evaluation on IPhO 2025 does.
Thus, avoiding or minimizing data contamination is field-wide challenge. The existence of
the risk of data contamination is not a sufficient reason not to do the evaluation, but the
results must be interpreted with caution. Although there are many evaluations of LLM on
IPhO 2025, Ref. [9] is the only one without data contamination and with human evaluation.
Very recently, Gemini 3 Deep Think was released and evaluated on IPhO 2025 theoretical
problems. The reported accuracy is 87.7% [14]. It was also noted that Gemini 3.1 Pro is the
“upgraded core intelligence that makes [the Gemini 3 Deep Think] breakthroughs possible”
[22]. This strongly suggests that Gemini 3 Deep Think is powered by Gemini 3.1 Pro. Thus,
the risk of data contamination for Gemini 3 Deep Think is at the same level as that for our
agent built on Gemini 3.1 Pro Preview.
Few details about the Deep Think evaluation [14] are provided other than saying that
“Answer correctness was evaluated with reference to canonical solutions using Gemini as a
judge.” Currently, Gemini 3 Deep Think is available in the Gemini app, but to our knowledge
this interface does not allow disabling web search. Gemini 3 Deep Think has not been made
generally available via the Gemini API. Therefore, we cannot evaluate it on IPhO 2025 by
ourselves. We have made all technical details of the evaluation of our Gemini agent fully
transparent, from dataset collection and curation to human grading of the agent’s solutions.
Acknowledgments
I would like to thank Pengchuan Zhang for a discussion and Lin F. Yang for many discussions.
I am especially grateful to LFY for independently confirming the error I found and described
in§3.2.2. I thank Google DeepMind for providing computational credits for using Gemini
models.
