record_id: s2_snowball:fe3ca4d9478869cd6c15102026a093c9ff283c0d
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2311.16542
fetched_title: AGENTS MEET OKR: A N OBJECT AND KEY RESULTS DRIVEN AGENT SYSTEM WITH HIERARCHICAL SELF - COLLABORATION AND SELF -E VALUATION
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:09:15Z

AGENTS MEET OKR: A N OBJECT AND KEY RESULTS
DRIVEN AGENT SYSTEM WITH HIERARCHICAL SELF -
COLLABORATION AND SELF -E VALUATION
Yi Zheng
Communication University of China & Kuaishou Technology
zhengyi7592@cuc.edu.cn
Chongyang Ma
Kuaishou Technology
chongyangma@kuaishou.com
Kanle Shi
Kuaishou Technology
shikanle@kuaishou.com
Haibin Huang
Kuaishou Technology
jackiehuanghaibin@gmail.com
ABSTRACT
In this study, we introduce the concept of OKR-Agent, which is designed to en-
hance the capabilities of Large Language Models (LLMs) in task-solving. Our
approach utilizes both self-collaboration and self-correction mechanisms, facili-
tated by hierarchical agents, to address the inherent complexities of target tasks.
Our key observations are two-fold: first, effective task solving demands in-depth
domain knowledge and intricate reasoning, for which deploying specialized agents
for individual sub-tasks can markedly enhance LLM performance. Second, task
solving intrinsically adheres to a hierarchical execution structure, comprising both
high-level strategic planning and detailed task execution. Towards this end, our
OKR-Agent paradigm aligns closely with this hierarchical structure, promising en-
hanced efficacy and adaptability across a wide range of scenarios. Specifically, our
framework includes two novel modules, i.e., hierarchical Objects and Key Results
generation and multi-level evaluation, both contributing to more efficient and robust
task-solving. In practice, hierarchical OKR generation decomposes objects into
multiple sub-objects and assigns new agents based on key results and agent respon-
sibilities. These agents subsequently elaborate on their designated tasks and may
further decompose them as necessary. Such generation operates recursively and
hierarchically, culminating in a comprehensive set of detailed solutions. The multi-
level evaluation module of OKR-Agent refines the solution by leveraging feedback
from all associated agents, optimizing each step of the process. This scheme
ensures the solution is accurate, practical, and meets the requirements of intricate
tasks, enhancing the overall reliability and quality of the outcome. Experimental
results demonstrate that our method outperforms previous methods on several tasks.
Code and demo are available at https://okr-agent.github.io/.
1 INTRODUCTION
The widespread application of Large Language Models (LLMs) has elicited transformative advance-
ments in various sectors. However, the intricate potential of LLMs remains underexplored, especially
in tasks of high complexity Qin et al. (2023); OpenAI (2023), such as curating movie scenes or
1
arXiv:2311.16542v1 [cs.CV] 28 Nov 2023

Figure 1: Pipeline of OKR-Agent. We utilize a hierarchical approach, where agent (LLM) decomposes
tasks into Objectives and Key Results, spawns role-specific agents, and fosters collaboration and
evaluation.
designing sophisticated travel plans, where LLMs face challenges related to knowledge and reasoning
intensity, due to issues such as hallucination Bang et al. (2023); Bubeck et al. (2023) and lack of slow
thinking Sloman (1996); Lin et al. (2023a).
In this study, we explore two crucial dimensions of utilizing LLMs for intricate tasks: enhancing self-
collaboration and enabling self-evaluation. Our investigation is motivated by two key observations.
Firstly, existing studies such as CoT Wei et al. (2023) and ToT Yao et al. (2023a) reveal that
introducing intermediate steps and adopting a multi-persona approach can markedly enhance the
performance of LLMs. Nevertheless, these methodologies necessitate manual workflow configuration
and agent assignment. The study of SPP Wang et al. (2023) demonstrates the potential of LLMs to
dynamically allocate agents, based on task inputs and user-specified requirements, and to produce
rational outputs. This observation has led us to explore deeper into the capability of LLMs to
autonomously decompose input tasks into meaningful goals and to formulate guidelines for agent
collaboration from varied perspectives. Secondly, the inherent multiplicity of potential solutions in
any collaborative undertaking necessitates the critical ability to discern, assess, and choose the most
apt solutions Li et al. (2023). Hence, we aim to unearth a mechanism that enables LLMs to effectively
evaluate and pinpoint the most promising solutions from a myriad of generated possibilities.
Inspired by the renowned success of the Objectives and Key Results (OKR) system in guiding
large corporations and organizations towards achievement, we have developed a unique goal-setting
framework within our Large Language Model (LLM) task-solving pipeline, namely OKR-Agent.
Specifically, OKR-Agent works in a hierarchical and self-collaboration manner. Given a concise
description of the task, a primary agent undertakes the initial analysis and generates a spectrum
of potential objectives, proceeding to select the most apt ones. Subsequently, this leading agent
incorporates additional agents based on the finalized objectives, assigning to each the corresponding
key results necessary for fulfillment. It is imperative to note that this process of agent assignment
is comprehensive, encompassing both the delineation of roles for each agent and the establishment
of inter-agent dependencies throughout the workflow. These newly incorporated agents possess the
capability to further break down the key results into subordinate objectives and key results, enabling a
substantial enlargement of the agent roster. This iterative and multi-level approach ensures that each
layer of the task has a dedicated focus, fostering a nuanced and thorough exploration of potential
solutions and strategies.
Another core component of OKR-Agent is multi-level self-evaluation. As illustrated in recent
works Park et al. (2023); Hong et al. (2023), assimilating evaluations from varied personas and
perspectives substantially enhances the accuracy and quality of outputs generated by LLM agents.
However, prevailing methodologies solicit feedback from agents based solely on their designated roles,
often neglecting a holistic overview of the content. We postulate that an effective agent evaluation
should not only be reflexive but also encompass assessments from agents in close relational proximity,
offering a more rounded perspective. With the architectural design of OKR-Agent, each agent is
cognizant of its relative position within the workflow, enabling it to furnish evaluations that encompass
all correlated perspectives and make modifications accordingly. Moreover, proficient evaluations at
both strategic and executional levels are crucial to guarantee the efficacy of the solution. The self-
2

evaluation works in a coarse-to-fine manner, where top-level agents scrutinize overarching strategies,
subsequently transitioning to lower-level agents who meticulously attend to execution details.
We further validate the efficacy of OKR-Agent through experiments encompassing three diverse tasks:
short video storyboard generation, multi-day trip planning, and trivia creative writing. Our empirical
results demonstrate that OKR-Agent surpasses preceding LLM-based task-solving methodologies,
exhibiting superior performance in both overarching planning and the intricacy of details, presenting
a consistent enhancement across diverse domains.
To summarize, our main contributions are as below:
• We introduce a new hierarchical and self-collaborative approach for task solving. It analyzes
and decomposes tasks into distinct objectives and assigns key results to various agents,
based on their roles and the workflow’s relative positions, enabling a more structured and
coherent approach to task execution.
• We propose a novel multi-level self-evaluation mechanism, allowing each agent to offer
evaluations from all related perspectives. This feature not only refines the accuracy and
quality of the outputs by incorporating various assessments and feedback but also ensures
that the evaluations are comprehensive, covering both strategic and executional levels.
• OKR-Agent has demonstrated its supremacy over existing LLM-based task-solving models
on on diverse tasks. It has shown consistent enhancements in both overall planning and
detail execution, making it a robust solution for complex task-solving scenarios.
2 RELATED WORK
2.1 P ROMPTING FRAMEWORK AND PIPELINE
Wei et al. (2023) introduces the concept of Chain-of-Thought, which effectively enhances the
reasoning ability of LLMs by generating a series of intermediate reasoning steps in response to a
question. Yao et al. (2023a) proposes to explore multiple feasible paths and combine searching and
backtracking, which significantly improves the effectiveness in solving complex logical reasoning
problems. Wang et al. (2023) proposes a reasoning method with automatic evaluation. This approach
involves automating the setup of multiple agents with different capabilities to evaluate and refine
reasoning results multiple times. It endows LLMs with stronger reasoning abilities while effectively
reducing hallucinations. Besta et al. (2023) introduces a GoT structure that can comprehensively
utilize the optimal results generated during the reasoning process. While ongoing advancements aim
to augment the task-solving capabilities of LLMs through the implementation of diverse reasoning
pipelines, a notable performance gap persists, particularly in generating intricate content requisite for
domains such as creative writing and storyboard generation. In this study, we explore an innovative
pipeline imbued with a hierarchical structure specifically engineered to address the complexities
inherent in such creative generation tasks.
2.2 S PECIFIC TASKS -SOLVING WITH AGENT AND LLM S
Numerous studies have delved into the enhancement of LLMs’ task-solving capabilities, exploring
innovative paradigms to boost their creative and problem-solving prowess in specific scenarios. Some
studies introduce systems optimizing inter-agent communication Li et al. (2023), whereas others
harmoniously amalgamate the behavioral propensities of agent groups with the advanced reasoning
capabilities of LLMs Park et al. (2023). These explorations, inclusive of works cited as Hong
et al. (2023); Cai et al. (2023); Lin et al. (2023b), have manifested remarkable advancements in
tailoring Agent-Pipeline solutions, demonstrating unparalleled creativity and proficiency in problem
resolution. Conversely, some research ventures Mirowski et al. (2023) have employed hierarchical
and structured approaches combined with specific role assignments to leverage the capabilities of
LLMs in generating long-form creative content, such as continuous scripts enriched with detailed
contextual elements. These studies, along with Zhang et al. (2019); Mishra et al. (2023); Liu et al.
(2023a), have exemplified commendable strides in integrating domain-specific knowledge to guide
LLMs in executing tasks with enhanced precision in respective domains.
3

Despite the plethora of advancements and innovations in LLMs, a common limitation is evident, i.e.,
the reliance on manual specification for both problem-solving processes and the determination of
agent attributes, impeding their versatility in generalized applications. To address this issue, our study
proposes leveraging LLMs as agents capable of self-collaboration and self-evaluation, a methodology
we posit is adaptable across a myriad of tasks.
2.3 C OGNITIVE SCIENCE AND LLM S
Researchers such as Piaget (1954); Pellegrini (2009); Wason & Johnson-Laird (1972); Sloman
(1996) have delved into the realms of human psychology and cognition, influencing subsequent
developments in artificial intelligence theory Chandrasekaran et al. (2017). Devlin et al. (2019);
Brown et al. (2020); OpenAI (2023); Chowdhery et al. (2022); Srivastava et al. (2023) demonstrate
the capabilities of large language models (LLMs) to the public. Shuster et al. (2022); Bang et al.
(2023); Liu et al. (2023b); Yao et al. (2023b); Lin et al. (2023a); Madaan et al. (2023); Shinn et al.
(2023), by integrating cognitive science with Large Language Models (LLMs), continuously explore
methods to enhance the capabilities of LLMs.
All of these approaches represent new explorations in both theoretical and methodological aspects,
providing fresh perspectives for the enhancement and development of LLMs in the future.
3 METHOD
In this section, we formally introduce OKR-Agent, as demonstrated in Figure 1 . We first revisit
the definition of task-solving of LLM Agents, and then provide details about OKR-Agent including
Self-Collaboration, Self-Evaluation, and the complete workflow.
Given an input instruction x and a model M, if we denote the final output to be y, then the Standard
Prompting can be formulated as:
y = M(x)
with the additional prompt p and intermediate generations z, Chain-Of-Thought(CoT)and Solo-
Performance-Prompting(SPP) can be described as below respectively:
y = M(pcot|x|{z1, z2, ..., zn})
y = M(pspp|x|zp|{z1
b , z2
b , ..., zn
b }|{z0
s , z1
f , ..., zm
f }j=1,2,..n)
where zi is the intermediate step in CoT, zp, zb, zf are the multi-personas and multi-run feedback in
SPP. For OKR-Agent, the goal is to hierarchically generate Objects(zo) and Key Results(zk) from
user input x, and assign persona zp accordingly. We also want the system can generate evaluations(ze)
as guidance during execution. Our system then can formulated as:
y = M(pokr|x|zp|{z1
o, z2
o, ..., zn
o }{z1
k, z2
k, ..., zn
k }{z1
e , z2
e , ..., zn
e }|j=1,2,..n) (1)
We now provide the details of the corresponding intermediate generations (z) in OKR-Agent.
Objects(zo) and Key Results( zk). At the core of our OKR-Agent pipeline is the hierarchical
derivation of Objects and Key Results. Given a user input x, the LLM acts as a Leading Agent (LA),
assigned to produce a set of potential targets that align with the user’s intentions. This generative
process can occur multiple times, allowing the LA to consolidate a selection of the most relevant
targets, referred to as the first level of Objects (zo). Subsequently, each object can be elaborated into
sub-objects, providing more nuanced details and forming the Key Results zk.
Agent Assignment(zp). Given the generated Objects(zo) and Key Results(zk), each can be paired
with an agent, constituting a structured set of agents. It is noteworthy that, unlike the SPP in Wang
et al. (2023), our agents are not chosen from a predefined list but are dynamically incorporated based
on OKR decomposition. This approach ensures that agent selection is not only task-driven but also
inherently adaptive to the tasks at hand. Specifically, each agent is accountable for its assigned
Object or Key Result: agents assigned to Objects oversee the broader aspects of the task, ensuring
overarching coherence, while those paired with Key Results focus on the fine details, maintaining
precision in execution.
4

Algorithm 1 GenOKR(UserInput, Hierarchy)
OKR = [], Agents = [], Evaluations = []
OKRTmp = [UserInput]
for level in Hierarchy do
levelOKRs = Generate Objects and Key Results From OKRTmp using LLM
levelAgents = Generate Agents From OKRs using LLM
levelEvaluations = Generate Evaluations From OKRs using LLM
OKR += levelOKRs, Agents += levelAgents ,Evaluations += levelEvaluations
OKRTmp = levelOKRs
end for
return OKR, Agents, Evaluations
Evaluations(ze). For each agent, it is crucial to develop evaluation criteria, represented as ze, to
direct its work. Once again, we employ LLM for criteria generation. Given the role definition and
corresponding OKR for an agent, we prompt the LLM to formulate a concise, one-sentence criterion
serving as the evaluation metric for the relevant segment in the final output.
3.1 H IERARCHICAL GENERATION
As depicted in Algorithm 1, the decomposition process of OKR, along with the generation of agents
and evaluations, can be conducted iteratively, allowing for a meticulous and organized delineation
of tasks, which ensures accuracy and uniformity throughout the task-solving trajectory. Formally,
the output of this generation stage is the structured OKR zo, zk with its associated agents zp and the
evaluations ze. This hierarchical configuration intrinsically forms inter-dependencies among agents,
enabling streamlined and efficient pathways for execution and evaluation.
Prompt generation. To prompt an LLM to follow the generation procedure as mentioned above,
we also designed the prompts of OKR decomposition and evaluation criteria, which help LLM to
perform as expected. Specifically, we use the following for OKR decomposition:
"You are an expert in ’Objective templates’. It is known that a key element of the ’Objective
template’ includes ’KR0,KR1,...,KRn’. Expand the keywords ’KRx’ within this Objective. List
keywords and separate each word with a comma, no extra words."
For agent generation, we use:
You are an expert in ’Objective’, tasked with creating content about ’KR0,KR1,...,KRn’.
Summarize the required job positions as ’JobTitle’. Connect the ’JobTitle’ with ’->’, without
unnecessary words.
Moreover, we use this prompt to generate evaluation criteria:
You are an outstanding ’JobTitle Expert’. Provide a sentence that thoroughly describes the
role of this position in ’Objective’ work, taking into account the professional characteristics of
’JobTitle’. The sentence should follow the structure "An excellent ’Objective’ should have the
characteristic of... in the aspect of XXX;" and should not exceed 200 words. Avoid unnecessary
words.
3.2 OKR-A GENT WORKFLOW
Following the Hierarchical Generation stage, the LLM advances to the execution phase. In this
phase, each agent is tasked with extending the solution per its assigned OKR, scrutinizing the
extended solution against its evaluation criteria and the accumulated ones from preceding agents, and
refining the solution based on the evaluations before forwarding the refined version to the subsequent
agent. This progression operates hierarchically, cascading from the Leading Agent down to the
leaf-node agents, culminating in the formulation of the final solution. We now provide details for
each component, the overall workflow is shown in Algorithm 2.
5

Algorithm 2 OKR-Agent Workflow
Answer = Null
OKR,Agents,Evaluations = GenOKR(UserInput)
WorkingEvaluation = []
for Agent in Agents do
WorkingEvaluation.append(Evaluations[Agent])
AnswerTemp = Agent update Answer with its OKR.
ReviewResult = Using WorkingEvaluation to get feedback for AnswerTemp
AnswerTemp = Modify AnswerTemp with ReviewResult
Answer = AnswerTemp
end for
return Answer
Solution expanding. For each agent, the essential task is to elaborate on the existing solution
per its designated OKR, which may involve enumerating sub-targets or enriching the details of key
results. Given that we employ OKR decomposition for the input tasks, it offers an intuitive key-value
method to represent the solution, wherein the keys can serve as objects and the values can retain the
details. In our experiments, we discovered that such a representation is more conducive for LLMs in
maintaining complicate information. We will provide examples in experiment section.
Solution review. Once the solution is expanded, the subsequent step for the agent is its review. Our
findings indicate that errors introduced at higher levels tend to propagate and accumulate in subsequent
levels, making it challenging for later agents to rectify them. Therefore, post-generation review by
the agent becomes imperative. To safeguard previously generated parts from unintended alterations,
we catalog the evaluation criteria of all preceding agents. These criteria are then amalgamated with
the current agent’s criteria, enabling a more precise and comprehensive evaluation.
Solution modification. Given the current solution and evaluation, the agent will be asked to modify
the solution in case there are errors, missing parts and so on. This refinement process can be executed
multiple times, allowing the agent to choose the iteration with the highest evaluation score.
4 EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we deploy the OKR-Agent to three distinct tasks: storyboard generation, creative
writing, and trip planning, to evaluate its efficacy and versatility in varying applications. Across these
diverse tasks, OKR-Agent exhibited exceptional capabilities in global task planning, maintaining
high levels of correctness, and generating rich details.
4.1 S HORT VIDEO STORYBOARD GENERATION
Storyboard generation. In the creation of a short video, a storyboard plays a pivotal role by taking
a writer’s narrative and structuring it for video production, delineating essential components like
shot composition, scene setup, actor performance, and dialogue through textual representations. It
acts as the linchpin, coordinating tasks across various roles in production. Nonetheless, crafting
a proficient storyboard script necessitates extensive professional knowledge. To democratize the
creation of visually compelling videos and make it accessible to everyone, we explored the proficiency
of OKR-Agent in executing this intricate task.
OKR Generation. In our experiment, we used the following user input: "A storyboard of ’The boy
picked up a robot, the boy repaired the robot, the boy and the robot became friends’." Referencing
2, we contrast the Objects and Key Results produced by OKR-Agent and ChatGPT. Owing to its
hierarchical structure, OKR-Agent elucidates more detailed and significant elements and requirements
for video production than ChatGPT. Additionally, our method autonomously generates the requisite
agents, deriving from the OKRs; for instance, the agents for OKR-L-2 include ’script writer’,
’director’, ’camera operator’, ’actor’, and ’musician’.
6

Figure 2: OKR-Agent vs ChatGPT
Plausibility of
the Story
Text/Image
Consistency
Visual Conti-
nuity
Average Advantages Weaknesses
OKRAgent
Prof. 3.24 3.61 3.34 3.34
Rich in details. The story may appear
a bit flat.Amtr. 3.25 3.75 3.5 3.45
W.M. 3.24 3.65 3.39 3.37
Dramatron
Prof. 3.3 2.75 2.48 2.875
The story is vivid.
The coherence be-
tween text and visu-
als is weak
Amtr. 3.7 3.3 2.95 3.25
W.M. 3.43 2.93 2.63 3
Table 1: Subjective Evaluation of Comparative Experiment on Text-to-Image Generation between OKR-Agent
and Dramatron.
Storyboard visuallization. Given the substantial visual and artistic elements in the storyboard
produced by OKR-Agent, we proceeded with an evaluation, employing user-study based subjective
assessments. We initiated the evaluation by generating results from OKR-Agent using the uniform
story input ("The boy found a robot, fixed it, and they became friends.") and visually represented
the script content utilizing AI "text to image" tools like MidJourney Midjourney.com (2023), where
the generated outputs served as prompts for deriving results. For comparative analysis, results were
similarly procured using DramaTron Dramatron (2023), with the comparative outputs illustrated in
Figure 3
We subsequently conduct a user-study involving 30 participants, comprised of 20 professionals from
the field of ’Digital Art Creation’ and 10 non-professionals. Participants were queried on various
aspects including ’Plausibility of the Story,’ ’Text/Image Consistency,’ and ’Visual Continuity,’
with the responses statistically illustrated in Table 1. The compiled data revealed that OKR-Agent,
leveraging its enhanced capability for text detail generation, demonstrated superior control over visual
elements in the text-to-image transformation process, marking a 24% improvement, and yielded more
consistent results, with a 28.9% increase compared to Dramatron. However, Dramatron exhibited a
richer storyline content, surpassing OKR-Agent by 5.2%, attributed to its distinctive ability to define
’storyline styles.’ The comparison between ’Professional’ and ’Amateur Evaluation’ discernibly
shows that professionals applied stricter assessment criteria, especially evident from Dramatron’s
scores. However, this stringent assessment did not translate to substantial differences in the evaluation
of OKR-Agent, underscoring the resilience and efficacy of OKR-Agent’s detailed output. More
visualization results of another input is provied in 4.
4.2 M ULTI-DAY TRIP PLANNING
This task aims to assess the coordination of individual sub-item arrangements within OKR-Agent in
multiple parallel planning scenarios, as well as the continuity and rationality of global planning. This
feature is particularly prominent in real-world travel planning tasks. Such planning is conducted on a
’day’-by-’day’ basis, where multiple factors need to be taken into account within a single day, each
with various inter-dependencies. Simultaneously, the overall arrangement also needs to be considered
for its rationality.
7

Figure 3: Storyboard visualization. Left: OKR-Agent; Right: Dramatron.
Figure 4: Another Story:Mom is making breakfast and calls for the boy to wake up. The boy lingers
in bed. The puppy rushes in and wakes him up.
In this task, OKR-Agent breaks down the mission into four objectives: determining the travel destina-
tion and itinerary, booking transportation and accommodation, planning daily activities, and preparing
contingency plans. This results in the corresponding agents: ’Travel Planner’, ’Accommodation and
Transportation Booking Officer’, ’Emergency Management Commissioner’, responsible for ’itinerary
arrangement’, ’transportation and accommodation planning’, and ’safety and financial management
tasks’ respectively.
Table 2 illustrates the divergent output results from OKR-Agent and ChatGPT, both generated from
identical user input—’Family Three-Day Hawaii Travel Plan.’ OKR-Agent exhibits a more thorough
8

Day 1 Day 2 Day 3
OKR The destination is the famous Waikiki Beach,
where visitors can enjoy traditional Hawaiian
performances in the evening. The mode of
transportation is by plane. Local cuisine in-
cludes traditional Hawaiian BBQ and seafood.
As for the budget, transportation is estimated
at 1000 USD, dining at 200 USD, and attrac-
tion tickets at 100 USD. Accommodation has
been arranged at a luxury beachfront hotel with
amenities like a swimming pool and gym. The
itinerary also covers taxi transportation to the
beach, sightseeing activities, and dining ar-
rangements by the beach.
This one-day itinerary revolves around a visit
to the V olcanoes National Park in Hawaii. The
mode of transportation is by renting a car, al-
lowing for flexibility in exploration. A must-try
local delicacy is the Hawaiian volcano stone-
grilled chicken. The day’s activities include
touring the V olcanoes National Park and ex-
periencing its unique volcanic terrain. Dining
arrangements offer the choice of dining with
the tour group or sampling snacks at the park.
The estimated budget covers transportation at
100 USD, dining expenses of 40 USD for lunch
and 50 USD for dinner, and attraction tickets at
30 USD. Accommodation is arranged at a lux-
urious beachfront hotel with amenities like a
swimming pool and gym, situated conveniently
by the beach.
This half-day itinerary will take you to Pearl
Harbor in Hawaii. The mode of transportation
is by taxi, which is convenient and efficient.
Local delicacies such as American hamburg-
ers, offering delicious options. The itinerary
includes taking a taxi to Pearl Harbor, partici-
pating in sightseeing activities at Pearl Harbor,
and shopping. Dining arrangements will be
made at restaurants within the tourist area for
a convenient experience. In terms of budget,
transportation is estimated at 70 USD, dining
expenses include lunch at 30 USD and din-
ner at 50 USD, and attraction tickets are esti-
mated at 20 USD. Accommodation is arranged
at a luxurious beachfront hotel, conveniently
located by the beach, and offers amenities such
as a swimming pool and gym. In the evening,
prepare to back home by plane.
ChatGPT On the first day, you will step onto the golden
sands of Waikiki Beach, feeling the deep blue
sea and the cheerful waves. You can choose
to surf, take a leisurely stroll, or simply lie
on the beach and bask in the sunlight. Come
lunchtime, try the local delicacies and savor
fresh seafood and tropical fruits. As evening
approaches, opt for a meal at a beachside
restaurant and enjoy the sunset casting its glow
on the water’s surface.
On the second day, you will head to the V ol-
canoes National Park to explore the magnifi-
cent landscapes of an active volcano. You can
embark on a hiking adventure to witness the
awe-inspiring sight of flowing lava, or visit
museums to understand the formation process
and history of volcanoes. For lunch, you can
choose to dine at one of the park’s restau-
rants and savor delicious authentic cuisine. As
evening approaches, you can unwind in the
nearby hot spring area, immersing yourself in
the unique charm of the volcanic region.
On the third day, you will visit Pearl Harbor,
exploring this place steeped in historical mem-
ory. You can visit the USS Arizona Memo-
rial, gaining an understanding of the historical
significance of the Pearl Harbor attack. After-
wards, you can explore other museums and his-
torical sites, delving deeper into the history of
World War II. Come lunchtime, savor the local
cuisine near Pearl Harbor, immersing yourself
in the local culture. In the afternoon, take a
leisurely stroll on the docks of Pearl Harbor,
feeling the tranquil and solemn sea breeze.
Table 2: Multi-day Trip Planning: Compared with ChatGPT, OKR-Agent presents more thorough
consideration of elements.
consideration of elements such as ’transportation’ and ’financial management’ compared to ChatGPT,
which is evidenced by the detailed inclusion of aspects like ’round-trip time arrangements for the first
and last days’ and ’airfare and car rental costs’ in the planning results. This reflects OKR-Agent’s
superior capability in producing comprehensive and realistic travel plans, catering to multiple facets
of trip planning.
4.3 T RIVIA CREATIVE WRITING
Creative Writing is the art of crafting written content that explores thoughts, feelings, and ideas,
utilizing narrative craft, character development, and literary tropes, often diverging from formal
writing styles to convey emotions, create imagery, and experiment with language across various
genres and forms like novels, poetry, and screenplays. In this task, we test the same input as in the
SPP paper: "Generate a paragraph of fantasy creative story."
Table 3 depicts the visual rendition of a fantastical adventure narrative, conceived by the OKR-Agent.
Our method elaborated on the prompt: "one-paragraph background story of an NPC for the next
Legend of Zelda game. The background story should mention ... by Jay Chou," resulting in the
creation of four enriched scenes.
In this experiment, OKR-Agent demonstrated its prowess by producing narratives with richer and
more layered content in comparison to SPP. The following is a narrative developed by OKR-Agent.
Words highlighted in red represent the accurate responses to the input queries. Owing to space
limitations, the comprehensive story has been relegated to the supplemental material:
5 CONCLUSION
In this study, we demonstrate the effectiveness of OKR-Agent in optimizing task-solving pathways
within intricate domains such as storyboard generation and creative writing. By leveraging hierarchical
structures and LLMs, it has enabled precise, coherent, and adaptive task planning and execution. The
findings from the comparative experiments underscore OKR-Agent’s superior global task planning
and detail generation capabilities, offering substantial contributions to artificial intelligence research.
It will be worth investigating incorporating human-in-the-loop approaches to fine-tune and augment
9

OKR-Agent The camera reveals the mysterious and vast continent of Hyrule in the game world, with magnificent mountains, lush trees, and flowing streams in
the distance. The protagonist confidently steps into Hyrule, while Ed Stark mysteriously emerges on the grass, his gaze unwaveringly fixed on the
protagonist. A gentle piano melody resonates, gradually infused with Jay Chou’s song "Slience", creating a tranquil and enigmatic atmosphere.Ed
leads the protagonist through the dense forest, gradually guiding them towards a dark crevice. Ed swiftly navigates through the trees, displaying his
combat skills and determination with the agility of a leopard. The incantation "Expecto Patronum" softly escapes from Ed’s lips...The protagonist
successfully defeats the forces of darkness, causing the obscurity to gradually dissipate, revealing the beautiful scenery and peaceful Hyrule. Ed and
the protagonist stand side by side on the mountain peak, victorious expressions gracing their faces. The music reaches its climax, "Slience" resounds
with a majestic movement that echoes through the sky, exemplifying the triumph of righteousness over evil.
SPP In the mystical land of Hyrule, there lived a wise and powerful sorcerer named Eddard. Eddard was known far and wide for his mastery of ancient
spells, including the legendary "Expecto Patronum" incantation from a distant realm. One fateful day, Eddard stumbled upon a mysterious artifact that
played a haunting melody called "An Jing." The melody resonated with his soul, unlocking a hidden power within him. With this newfound power,
Eddard dedicated his life to protecting the people of Hyrule from the forces of darkness, becoming a beloved figure in the Legend of Zelda
Table 3: Trivia Creative Writing: OKR-Agent can produce richer and more layered content in
comparison to SPP.
the capabilities of OKR-Agent, enabling real-time human interaction to enhance creative content
generation and problem-solving processes.
