record_id: s2_snowball:90aee9a262f50fd84b62fd9bcd4a048e48adb497
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2504.13472
fetched_title: An Agent-based Evaluation Framework for Complex Code Generation
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:33Z

An Agent-based Evaluation Framework for
Complex Code Generation
Xinchen Wang1†, Ruida Hu 1†, Pengfei Gao 2, Chao Peng 2, Cuiyun Gao 1*
1Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen, China
2ByteDance, Beijing, China
200111115@stu.hit.edu.cn, 200111107@stu.hit.edu.cn,
gaopengfei.se@bytedance.com, pengchao.x@bytedance.com, gaocuiyun@hit.edu.cn
Abstract— Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated
strong capabilities in code generation, underscoring the crit-
ical need for rigorous and comprehensive evaluation. Exist-
ing evaluation approaches fall into three categories, including
human-centered, metric-based, and LLM-based. Considering
that human-centered approaches are labour-intensive and metric-
based ones overly rely on reference answers, LLM-based ap-
proaches are gaining increasing attention due to their stronger
contextual understanding capabilities. However, they generally
evaluate the generated code based on static prompts, and tend
to fail for complex code scenarios which typically involve multiple
requirements and require more contextual information. In addi-
tion, these approaches lack fine-grained evaluation for complex
code, resulting in limited explainability.
To mitigate the limitations, we propose CodeVisionary, the first
agent-based evaluation framework for complex code generation.
CodeVisionary consists of two stages: (1)Requirement-guided
multi-dimensional context distillation stage, which first formulates
a detailed evaluation plan by decomposing task requirements, and
then stepwise collects multi-dimensional contextual information
for each requirement. (2)Fine-grained scoring and summarization
stage, which defines self-directed and negotiation-based actions,
allowing multiple judges to comprehend complex code from fine-
grained and diverse viewpoints, and reach a consensus through
discussion. A comprehensive evaluation report is also generated
for enhanced explainability. For validation, we construct a
new benchmark consisting of 363 samples spanning 37 coding
scenarios and 23 programming languages. Extensive experiments
demonstrate that CodeVisionary achieves the best performance
among three baselines for evaluating complex code generation,
outperforming the best baseline with average improvements of
0.217, 0.163, and 0.141 in Pearson, Spearman, and Kendall-
Tau coefficients, respectively. The resources of CodeVisionary are
available at https://github.com/Eshe0922/CodeVisionary.
Index Terms—Code generation evaluation, large language
models, AI agent
I. INTRODUCTION
With the rapid development of large language models
(LLMs), these models have demonstrated promising results
in code generation [1], [2]. LLM-based code assistants, such
as GitHub Copilot [3] and Cursor [4], have attracted a great
number of users, effectively addressing their programming
needs. Effectively evaluating the capabilities of LLMs in
†Work done during an internship at ByteDance.
∗Corresponding author.
accomplishing code generation tasks is beneficial for iden-
tifying their shortcomings, ultimately enhancing the practical
utility in real-world software development scenarios. Current
approaches for evaluating code generation can be categorized
into human-centered, metric-based, and LLM-based. Human-
centered approaches [5], [6] rely on domain experts to evaluate
generated code based on their professional knowledge and
programming experience. Although domain experts can offer
accurate evaluations, these approaches are labour-intensive.
Metric-based approaches [7]–[11] typically require reference
answers as ground truth or high-quality unit tests, which are
generally difficult to create, maintain, and scale across diverse
programming languages [12], [13].
Recently, LLM-based approaches [14], [15] have gained
increasing attention among researchers and practitioners.
LLMs possess strong context-understanding and instruction-
following capabilities, allowing them to perform more accurate
evaluations. Compared to metric-based approaches, LLM-
based approaches do not depend on specific benchmarks, elim-
inating the need to develop or identify suitable benchmarks,
define precise evaluation metrics, or construct ground truth
for tasks in the benchmark. However, current LLM-based
approaches still face limitations for complex code scenarios.
To better demonstrate these limitations, we analyze the failure
cases of ICE-SCORE [14], an advanced and representative
LLM-based approach for evaluating code generation:
(1) Lack of multi-dimensional contextual information:
Complex code scenarios often encompass diverse requirements
on runtime behavior, user interaction, and so on. Such re-
quirements often rely on specific contextual information to
be properly evaluated. Figure 1(a) illustrates several scenarios
where the existing LLM-based approaches fall short.Scenario
1⃝: Lack of latest programming technology knowledge.
When code generation tasks involve the latest programming
technologies, these approaches fail to provide accurate eval-
uation due to a lack of relevant knowledge. For instance, a
task requires using the “map” function in “Python 3.14”
to multiply two lists, with the built-in parameter configured to
check for length mismatches. The generated code correctly
leverages the “map” function with a “strict” parameter
(Line 6), which is introduced in “Python 3.14” to enforce
length checking. However, ICE-SCORE assigns a score of
arXiv:2504.13472v2 [cs.SE] 20 Oct 2025

2, reasoning that both “Python 3.14” and the “strict”
parameter do not exist. This instance highlights the inability of
current LLM-based approaches to handle tasks involving the
latest programming technologies.Scenario 2⃝: Lack of visual
and interaction information.When involving front-end code,
these approaches cannot view or interact with the graphical
interface, leading to inaccurate evaluations. For instance, a
task involves creating a webpage with a dropdown menu. In
the generated code, the “select” component’s “option”
element assigns the value “Option1” (Line 12), while the
conditional logic (Line 24) checks for “option1”. This mis-
match in case between “Option1” and “option1” prevents
the intended interaction functionality. However, because ICE-
SCORE cannot simulate the graphical interface, it overlooks
this issue and incorrectly evaluates the code as meeting the task
requirements. This instance highlights that the lack of visual
and interaction information may lead to flawed evaluations.
Scenario 3⃝: Lack of runtime and linting information.
Other information regarding code execution, syntax checking,
and potential code issues is crucial for comprehensive evalu-
ations. Without external tools, LLM-based approaches cannot
access this information [12]. For instance, a task requires gen-
erating code in “C” programming language to update the time
in real-time. The generated code uses the “sleep” function
(Line 12) but omits the necessary “<unistd.h>” header file.
This omission would result in a compilation error. As ICE-
SCORE cannot execute the code or leverage static analysis
tools, it fails to detect this problem and incorrectly assigns a
score of 4. The examples indicate that the absence of multi-
dimensional context tends to render LLM-based approaches
inaccurate [12].
(2) Omission of certain issues in complex code:Real-
world code generation tasks often involve multiple require-
ments, resulting in generated code comprising numerous snip-
pets with potential issues. Current LLM-based approaches
struggle to fully comprehend and evaluate complex code
in a fine-grained manner, as they typically require multi-
ple reasoning steps and detailed evaluation of each task
requirement and its corresponding code snippet [6], [16].
Figure 1(b) illustrates a case of a student grade manage-
ment system task. The generated code includes numerous
functions, such as “add_student”, “remove_student”,
and “calculate_average_grade”. ICE-SCORE scores
the code 3, deeming it satisfies most task require-
ments and pinpointing issues such as duplicate keys
for “course_id” (Line 48) and missing validation for
“grade”. However, it overlooks another critical issue in
the “calculate_average_grade” function (Line 160).
Specifically, the return statement “return total_points
/ total_courses” (Line 168) does not handle division
by zero when “total_courses” is zero. This instance
demonstrates that LLM-based approaches may overlook cer-
tain issues of complex code.
Besides, current LLM-based approaches solely provide an
evaluation score without assessment details, which limits their
usefulness in practical development workflows. As the automa-
(a) Lack of multi
-
dimensional contextual information
Scenario
①
: Lack of latest programming technology knowledge
# Code Generation Task:
Use `map` function
in Python 3.14
to
multiply
two lists.
C
onfigure
the parameter to raise exception
s
i
f the lists have different lengths
.
Score: 2/4
Reason: Python 3.14 and the `strict` parameter do not exist.
# Generated code:
# Evaluation of ICE
-
SCORE:
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
[6]
def

multiply
(a, b):

return

a * b
list1 = [1, 2, 3, 4]
list2 = [5, 6, 7]
result =
list
(
map
(multiply, list1, list2,
strict
=
True
))
Python 3.14
introduced
Scenario
②
: Lack of visual and interaction information
Create a webpage with a dropdown menu: Option 1 shows text
input and Option 2 shows number input.
[11]
[12]
[13]
...
[24]
[25]
<
select

id
="options"
name
="options"
onchange
="
showInputField
()"
>

<
option

value
=
"Option1"
>Option 1</
option
>
</
select
>

if

(
select.value

===
"option1"
)

{

textInput.classList.
remove
(
"hidden"
);}

Score: 4/4
Reason: This code snippet is very helpful and meets the task needs.
# Code Generation Task:
# Generated code:
# Evaluation of ICE
-
SCORE:
Mismatch
Scenario
③
: Lack of runtime and linting information
Obtain and update the current time in real
-
time in the `C` language.
[1]
[2]
[3]
[4]
...
[12]
#include
<
stdio.h
>
#include
<
time.h
>
int

main
() {

time_t

rawtime
;

sleep
(1); }
Score: 4/4
Reason: This code snippet is very helpful and solves the task.
# Code Generation Task:
# Generated code:
# Evaluation of ICE
-
SCORE:
omit
<
unistd.h
>
(b)
O
mission of

certain issues
i
n

complex code
# Code Generation Task:
# Generated code:
# Evaluation of ICE
-
SCORE:
Implement a comprehensive student grade management system that supports
adding, deleting, and updating information like students and courses.
[10]
...
[36]
...
[47]
[48]
...
[60]
[61]
...
[160]
[161]
[162]
[163]
[164]
[165]
[166]
[167]
[168]
[169]
...
[187]
...
def

add_student
(
student_id
, name):

...
def

remove_student
(
student_id
):

...
def

add_course
(
course_id
,
course_name
):

courses[
course_id
] =
course_name

...
def

add_grade
(
student_id
,
course_id
, grade):

students[
student_id
].courses[
course_id
] = grade

...
def

calculate_average_grade
(
student_id
):

student

= students[
student_id
]

total_points

= 0

total_courses

= 0

for

grade

in

student
.courses.values
():

if

grade

is not None
:

total_points

+=
grade

total_courses

+= 1

return

total_points

/
total_courses
def

generate_report_card
(
student_id
):

...
def

list_students_in_course
(
course_id
):

...
Score: 3/4
Reason: This response satisfies most requirements. However, note the issues
of duplicate keys for `
course_id
` and missing validation for `grade`.
Division by zero
Duplicate key insertion
Invalid value assignment
Fig. 1: Examples for illustrating the limitations of LLM-based
approaches for evaluating code generation. Each example
includes the code generation task, the generated code, and the
evaluation of ICE-SCORE. ICE-SCORE ratings range from 0
to 4, with higher scores indicating higher quality.
tion of code generation evaluation is being integrated into
the Continuous Integration/Continuous Deployment (CI/CD)
pipeline of software development [12], real-time and compre-
hensive evaluation reports are essential for the rapid improve-

ment of LLMs and better align with developers’ preferences.
Considering the limitations faced by the LLM-based ap-
proaches, we propose an agent-based evaluation framework
for complex code generation, namedCodeVisionary. Agent-
based frameworks can interact with the environment by in-
voking external tools and are capable of handling com-
plex tasks [17]–[19]. Given a code generation task and the
corresponding generated code, CodeVisionary evaluates the
code through two stages, ultimately providing an evaluation
score and evaluation report:(1) Requirement-guided multi-
dimensional context distillation stage: We first formulate
a detailed evaluation plan by decomposing task require-
ments, and then gather multi-dimensional contextual infor-
mation for each requirement step by step.(2) Fine-grained
scoring and summarization stage: We define self-directed
and negotiation-based strategies, enabling multiple judges to
analyze complex code from fine-grained and diverse perspec-
tives and reach consensus through discussion. Finally, we
consolidate the assessment details and construct a structured
evaluation report.
We summarize the major contributions of this paper as
follows:
(1) We propose the first agent-based evaluation framework
for complex code generation, named CodeVisionary, to ad-
dress the limitations of lacking multi-dimensional contextual
information and complete analysis.
(2) We design a two-stage code evaluation pipeline for
CodeVisionary: a requirement-guided multi-dimensional con-
text distillation stage for collecting contextual information, and
a fine-grained scoring and summarization stage for assessing
generated code in a fine-grained manner. Finally, we provide
comprehensive evaluation reports.
(3) We conduct thorough experiments on CodeVisionary.
The results demonstrate its effectiveness across different pro-
gramming languages and coding scenarios.
The remaining sections of this paper are organized as
follows: Section II presents the architecture of CodeVision-
ary. Section III describes the experimental setup, including
datasets, baselines, and experimental settings. Section IV re-
ports and analyzes the experimental results. Section V further
presents the effectiveness of CodeVisionary among different
coding scenarios and programming languages, a case study
of generated evaluation reports, performance on less complex
benchmarks, and the threats to validity. Section VI introduces
the background of code generation evaluation and LLM-based
agents. Section VII concludes the paper.
II. APPROACH
In this section, we describe the overall framework of Code-
Visionary. As shown in Figure 2, CodeVisionary consists of
two stages: (1) Requirement-guided multi-dimensional context
distillation stage for gathering contextual information, and
(2) Fine-grained scoring and summarization stage for scoring
generated code through discussion between multiple judges.
CodeVisionary utilizes LLMs as central control agents to
conduct multi-turn interactions with the environment. During
each interaction, the LLM agent responds with “thought”
and “action”, respectively, where “thought” represents its
reasoning analysis of the environment feedback and “action”
represents the command to be executed. As depicted in the
“Agent Runtime” part of Figure 2, the actions are executed
within the environment, and the corresponding environment
feedback is collected as “observation” to the LLM agent in
the next interaction.
A. Requirement-guided Multi-dimensional Context Distilla-
tion Stage
In this stage, CodeVisionary utilizes an LLM agent to gather
multi-dimensional contextual information, including the latest
programming technology knowledge, visual and interaction
information, runtime and linting information, and so on. The
LLM agent follows the paradigm of “environment construc-
tion”, “requirement comprehension”, “plan formulation”, and
“stepwise analysis”. This paradigm mirrors the way humans
address complex problems. Before solving complex problems,
people typically decompose the requirements and formulate
a plan, then proceed to analyze and solve the problem se-
quentially to ensure all requirements are satisfied, as recent
studies [20], [21] conclude that prompting LLMs to formulate
plans before addressing problems is effective. Our designed
paradigm is as follows:
a)Environment Construction:This phase aims to con-
struct a complete and executable programming environment,
serving as a necessary preparation for subsequent evaluations.
Specifically, the agent configures the environment within a
Docker container based on the code generation task and the
generated code. The initial Docker container is configured with
network settings and our custom external tools. Constructing
the environment typically involves setting up the programming
language runtime and installing the external dependencies.
Figure 2 illustrates a task where the agent sets up the
“Python” interpreter and installs the “Pandas” dependency
for data processing. For more complex tasks, additional setup
of configuration files and environment variables is required.
b)Requirement Comprehension:This phase aims to
enhance the agent’s comprehension of the task requirements
and prepare for formulating a thorough evaluation plan tailored
to each requirement. Specifically, the agent comprehends the
code generation task and decomposes the task requirements.
As illustrated in Figure 2(a), the agent breaks down the code
task into several detailed requirements: “Read and print file
contents”, “Handle file reading exceptions”, and “Count and
save occurrences of words”. This decomposition enables the
agent to better grasp complex tasks by dividing them into
smaller, more manageable components.
c)Plan Formulation:This phase divides the evaluation
of generated code into several steps, which facilitates the
verification of each task requirement and reduces the reasoning
burden on the agent. Specifically, the agent formulates a
detailed evaluation plan. Each step in the plan includes a brief
goal(i.e., “Goal”) and specificguidance(i.e., “Guidance”) on
how to achieve the goal. As illustrated in Figure 2(a), the plan

Step 1.1: Execute
Stepwise Analysis
### Thought: I will execute the first step in the plan.
### Action: linter_analyse –f count.py
### Observation: Linter analyse report ...
Step 1.2: Analyze
### Thought: I will report the evaluation result of the
current step in the plan.
### Action: analyse_current_step
### Report: This file has some code style issues,
specifically...
### Thought: I will execute the second step in the plan.
### Action: python3 count.py
### Observation: Execution message of the file ...
Step 2.1: Execute
Requirement 1
Requirement 2
Requirement 3
Requirement comprehension
Read and print file contents
Handle file reading exceptions
Count and save occurrences of words.
Step 2
Step 3
Step 4
Step 1
Plan formulation
Goal:Static Linter Analysis,
Guidance:Use `linter_analysis` to check the ...
Goal:Dynamic Execution Analysis,
Guidance:Execute the code and analyze ...
Goal:Web Browsing Analysis,
Guidance:Use `web browse` for reference insight.
Goal:General Semantic Analysis,
Guidance:Analyze the functionality of ...
Input
Generated Code
Hi, how can I read a CSV file
using Pandas in Python, print
its contents, handle
exceptions, count each word's
occurrences, and save the
results to a new file?
The evaluation score is: 2.
The markdown format report is:
The pdf format report is:
Environment construction
Sure! Here’s a step-by-step
guide on how to ...
```
def read_file(path):
def count_words(text):
def save_counts(counts, path):
```
Make sure to replace
'input.csv' and
'word_counts.csv' with the
actual paths to your input and
output files.
Agent Runtime
Dynamic Execution
Screenshot
General Semantic
Bash Command
Interaction
Web Browsing
Unit Tests
Static Linter
Code Generation Task
(a) Requirement-guided multi-dimensional context distillation stage
Score: 2
Score: 2
Score: 4
(b) Fine-grained scoring and summarization stage
Step 2.2: Analyze
### Thought: I will report the evaluation result.
### Action: analyse_current_step
### Report: Based on the execution message, we think ...
Programming Environment
Configuration Files
Dependencies
Environment Variables
. . .
Action
Observation
2
Disagree
2
4
Agree
Disagree
2
2
4→2
Change
. . .
Maintain
Maintain
multiple
rounds
Template
LLM
initial
report
pandoc
prettier
negotiation-based actions
Output
initial scoringself-directed actions
Fig. 2: The architecture of CodeVisionary. It consists of two main stages: (a) Requirement-guided multi-dimensional context
distillation stage for collecting contextual information based on the stepwise evaluation plan, and (b) Fine-grained scoring and
summarization stage for generating evaluation scores and reports through negotiation with diverse viewpoints.
formulated by the agent includes goals such as “Static Linter
Analysis”, and “Dynamic Execution Analysis”, along with
corresponding guidance. The goal and guidance of each step
in the plan collectively specify the action that the agent should
take. For instance, the goal of the “Static Linter Analysis” is
to ensure the generated code adheres to code syntax and style,
and the guidance is to take the “linter_analysis” action.
Below is a list of all possible actions during each step:
•Dynamic Execution:This action checks for any compi-
lation errors and analyzes whether the execution message
aligns with the expected requirement. Possible commands
include “python test.py” for running a Python
script, “gcc -o output test.c && ./output”
for compiling and executing a C program, and so on.
•Static Linter:This action checks for syntax errors,
code issues, and style inconsistencies. It helps identify
potential problems in the generated code without exe-
cution. We design the command “linter_analysis
-f ‘path’” to check a file or directory for syntax com-
pliance. This command automatically selects appropriate
static analysis tools for the given file path and returns a
structured analysis report.
•Unit Tests:This action involves writing and executing
unit tests, ensuring the generated code meets specific
requirements and behaves as expected under various
conditions. These unit tests support requirement analysis
by providing different inputs and validating the outputs
through assertions. For instance, consider a function that
processes a list of integers and returns a list of their
squares, but only for even numbers. A unit test might
provide the input “[1, 2, 3, 4]” and utilize the as-
sertion “assert process_list([1, 2, 3, 4])
== [4, 16]” to verify that the output is as expected.
•Screenshot:This action involves capturing a screenshot
of the front-end code to support requirement analysis
through visualization. We design the command
“screenshot_analysis -f ‘path’ -q
‘query’”, which renders the specified file as a
screenshot and generates an analysis report utilizing
a multimodal LLM. The agent can also query the
screenshot to extract relevant visual information, such as
UI elements and layout.
•Interaction:This action involves simulating user
interactions with the front-end code to evaluate
the interaction requirements. We extend the
“screenshot_analysis” command with the
“-a ‘actions’” parameter to interact with the
graphical interface before capturing the screenshot.
Possible interactions include clicking elements, filling
input fields, hovering over elements, and scrolling.
•Web Browsing:This action involves retrieving additional
information from the website, including knowledge of
the latest and specialized programming technologies. We
design the command “web_browse -q ‘query’” to
search the website according to the query.
•General Semantic:Considering the LLM’s powerful

contextual understanding capabilities, the agent can also
evaluate whether the generated code satisfies require-
ments related to complexity, security, and robustness,
without invoking external tools.
•Bash Command:In addition to the actions designed
specifically for code generation, the agent also needs
to call bash commands during the evaluation process to
perform steps such as writing code, writing data, viewing
files, and navigating the file system.
d)Stepwise Analysis:In this phase, the agent follows the
evaluation plan by executing the specified action at each step
and analyzing the corresponding execution results. The agent
alternates between executing and analyzing during interac-
tions, with its current state indicated as “Execute State”
or “Analyze State”.
•Execute State:In this state, the agent takes the
action specified in the current step. The action is executed
within the constructed Docker container, and the corre-
sponding execution results are collected as the environ-
ment feedback (i.e., “observation”) to the agent. Besides,
the following hint is given as additional environment
feedback to facilitate the evaluation process:
Hint:Once you have executed the actions in the current step,
you should analyze and report the execution results in the next
interaction. If the step is not yet finished, please continue
working on it.
•Analyze State:In this state, the agent takes the
action “analyze_current_step” to analyze and re-
port the execution results. We predefine different analysis
report templates tailored to the execution results of dif-
ferent actions. Similarly, the following hint is provided
as additional environment feedback:
Hint:You have submitted the analysis report of the current
step. Please review the steps you have already completed and
proceed to the next step.
Besides, the agent can adjust the evaluation plan in real time
based on the actual evaluation process to enhance flexibility.
Finally, the analysis reports from each step, together with
the code generation task, generated code, and decomposed
requirements, are collected as input for the next stage.
B. Fine-grained Scoring And Summarization Stage
In this stage, CodeVisionary employs multiple LLM agents
to act as judges, scoring the generated code through col-
laborative discussion. Since a single judge may potentially
overlook issues in complex code or make misjudgements,
involving multiple judges enables more fine-grained evaluation
by incorporating diverse viewpoints and facilitating consensus.
This negotiation strategy can improve the thoroughness and
reliability of the evaluation results, as different judges focus
on different issues and aspects of the generated code.
1) Definition of Judges:LetA 1,A 2,...,A n denote the
nLLM agents acting as individual judges. Each judgeA i
assigns a score to the generated code based on the decomposed
requirements, stepwise analysis reports from Section II-A, and
the evaluation criteria. The evaluation criteria include aspects
of correctness, functionality, and clarity. Below, we present an
example of the clarity aspect and its corresponding evaluation
criteria, while the remaining aspects and criteria are available
in our repository:
Clarity:Is the generated code explained in an easy-to-
understand manner, logically clear, and unambiguous?
- 0/4:Mostly unclear or confusing; very difficult to under-
stand.
- 1/4:Significant ambiguity, partially understandable; con-
tains several confusing parts.
- 2/4:Some ambiguity, but mostly understandable; contains
some unclear parts.
- 3/4:Mostly clear, slight ambiguity; generally easy to
understand with minor issues.
- 4/4:Very clear, no ambiguity, well-organized; completely
easy to understand.
Each judge provides an evaluation scoreS i and correspond-
ing scoring reasonR i. Formally, each judgeA i is represented
as a tuple:
Ai = (S i,R i)(1)
whereS i andR i denote the score and reason provided by the
judgeA i, respectively.
2) Negotiation and Scoring:After each judgeA i has pro-
vided their initial scoreS 0
i and reasonR 0
i , these evaluations
are shared among all other judges, ensuring that each judge is
aware of their peers’ assessments. This process can be formally
expressed as:
∀i,j∈{1,2,...,n},(S 0
i,R 0
i )→A j (2)
Then these judges engage in multiple rounds of negotiation
to reach a consensus. Letkdenote the round number. In each
roundk, each judgeA i may take one or more actionsAction k
i ,
which can be categorized into two types: self-directed actions
and negotiation-based actions.
Self-directed actions allow a judge to manage their own
evaluation, including maintaining the current scoreS i and
the reasonR 0
i (Maintain), changing the scoreS i and the
reasonR 0
i (Change), or withdrawing a previously stated
opinion from roundkin light of possible opinion changes
(Withdraw). Formally, these actions are defined as:
Actionsself-directed =



Maintain(E)
Change(Si,R i,E)
Withdraw(k,E)



(3)
Negotiation-based actions, on the other hand, facilitate
consensus-building among judges. These actions correspond to
three forms of negotiation, including explicitly agreeing with
another judge’s score and reason(Agree), requesting clarifi-
cation(Query), or expressing disagreement(Disagree).

TABLE I: Statistics of the constructed benchmark.
Statistics Number
Samples363
Code Generation Tasks121
Coding Scenarios37
Programming Languages23
Average String Length
Code Generation Task 1,906
LLM-generated Response 2,650
Formally, these actions are defined as:
Actionsnegotiation-based =



Agree(Aj,E)
Query(Aj,E)
Disagree(Aj,E)



(4)
Hence, theAction k
i taken by the judgeA i in roundkis
given by:
Actionk
i⊆{Actions self-directed∪Actions negotiation-based}(5)
These judges are required to provide an explanation (i.e.,E)
while taking different actions. After each roundk, the current
score and reason of each judge, as well as the actions taken,
are shared among all judges:
∀i,j∈{1,2,...,n},(S k
i,R k
i,Action k
i )→A j (6)
The negotiation ends when either the number of rounds is
exceeded or all judges reach a consensus on the evaluation
score. The final evaluation score is calculated as the average
of the scores provided by all judges:
Evaluation Score= 1
n
nX
i=1
Si (7)
3) Summarization and Evaluation Report Generation:We
obtain the environment configuration, task requirements, and
stepwise analysis reports in Section II-A and the final evalua-
tion score in Section II-B2. Besides, CodeVisionary leverages
another LLM to conclude the overall evaluation results, which
consist of the evaluation reasons and the optimization sugges-
tions provided by multiple judges after negotiation. Formally,
this process can be represented as:
Evaluation Score,{(S i,R i)|i= 1,2,...,n}−−→
Evaluation Reason,Optimization Suggestion (8)
Then the agent generates the initial evaluation report in
Markdown format. To enhance readability, we standardize and
beautify the initial evaluation report. We utilize Prettier [22]
to check for formatting issues and maintain a consistent style.
Besides, we employ Pandoc [23] to convert the Markdown
report to PDF format.
III. EXPERIMENTALSETUP
In this section, we evaluate the CodeVisionary and aim to
answer the following research questions (RQs):
RQ1:How does CodeVisionary perform in evaluating code
generation compared with different methods?
RQ2:What is the influence of different stages on the
performance of CodeVisionary?
RQ3:How do different hyper-parameters impact the per-
formance of CodeVisionary?
A. Datasets
CodeArena [24] is a human-curated benchmark of 397 high-
quality code generation tasks, covering various coding scenar-
ios and programming languages. It simulates the complexity
and diversity of real-world tasks, with each task classified as
“easy”, “medium”, or “hard” based on complexity. To evalu-
ate CodeVisionary’s performance across diverse and complex
tasks, we filter CodeArena, generate responses using different
LLMs, and manually score the responses. The filtering, re-
sponse generation, and manual scoring process is as follows:
(1) Filtering: We first retain tasks classified as “hard”.
Then, we filter out tasks that depend on specific software or
platforms, such as those requiring MATLAB or Verilog.
(2) Response Generation: We generate responses for each
code generation task utilizing three popular LLMs, including
GPT-3.5-turbo [25], Claude-3.5-Sonnet [26], and GPT-4o [27].
(3) Manual Scoring: Each code generation task and corre-
sponding LLM-generated response is scored by two experi-
enced experts, each with over five years of expertise in the
relevant programming languages. Scoring is conducted on a
scale from 0 to 4, where higher scores indicate better response
quality, following the widely-used evaluation criteria [5]. Due
to page limitations, the detailed evaluation criteria are available
in our repository. The Kappa coefficient between the two
experts exceeds 80%, indicating a high level of agreement.
In case of scoring discrepancies, a third expert is introduced
to adjudicate. All experts remain unaware of the identity of
the LLM that generates each response.
The statistics of our constructed benchmark are illustrated
in Table I. The benchmark covers 37 coding scenarios and
23 programming languages, enabling thorough assessment of
CodeVisionary across diverse tasks. Each sample is repre-
sented as a triplet: (code generation task, LLM-generated
response, human-annotated score).
B. Comparison Baselines
To evaluate the performance of CodeVisionary, we compare
the state-of-the-art LLM-based approaches. Following the pre-
vious work [15], we also introduce a vanilla approach as the
baseline method.
•V ANILLAdirectly prompts LLMs to determine the cor-
rectness and helpfulness of the response.
•ICE-Score [14]utilizes assessment criteria and an eval-
uation step template to evaluate the usefulness and func-
tional correctness of the response.
•CODEJUDGE [15]guides LLMs in performing “slow
thinking” to arrive at an in-depth and reliable evaluation
of semantic correctness.

TABLE II: Comparison results between CodeVisionary and baseline methods.
Models GPT-3.5-turbo Claude-3.5-Sonnet GPT-4o A VG
Metrics rp rs τ rp rs τ rp rs τ rp rs τ
V ANILLA0.083 0.129 0.117 0.033 0.098 0.094 0.010 0.047 0.045 0.042 0.091 0.085
ICE-SCORE0.100 0.177 0.157 0.029 0.096 0.092 -0.011 0.054 0.051 0.039 0.109 0.100
CODEJUDGE0.130 0.130 0.120 0.097 0.074 0.072 0.025 0.078 0.076 0.084 0.094 0.089
CodeVisionary 0.325 0.286 0.247 0.317 0.278 0.262 0.262 0.253 0.214 0.301 0.272 0.241
C. Evaluation Metrics
We follow best practices in natural language generation
evaluation and utilize Pearson (r p), Spearman (r s), and
Kendall-Tau (τ) coefficients to measure the correlation be-
tween evaluation scores assigned by different approaches and
the ground truth (i.e., scores annotated by humans).
D. Implementation Details
CodeVisionary and the baseline methods are provided ac-
cess to GPT-4o. For the requirement-guided multi-dimensional
context distillation stage, we limit the maximum number of
interactions to 40 and set the sampling temperature to 0.2. For
the fine-grained scoring and summarization stage, we set the
sampling temperature to 0.7 and the number of judges to 3, and
allow up to 4 rounds of negotiation. For the baseline methods,
we try our best to reproduce them from publicly available
source code and papers, and use the same hyper-parameter
settings. For all correlation metrics, we use the implementation
from SciPy [28] and call these APIs with the default settings.
IV. EXPERIMENTALRESULTS
A. RQ1: Effectiveness of CodeVisionary in Evaluating Code
Generation
To answer RQ1, we conduct a comprehensive analysis
against three baseline methods. The experimental results are
shown in Table II.
CodeVisionary exhibits superior performance compared
with the baseline methods.As shown in Table II, we
observe that CodeVisionary consistently outperforms all the
baseline methods across three LLMs (i.e., responses generated
by GPT-3.5-turbo, Claude-3.5-Sonnet, and GPT-4o). Overall,
CodeVisionary achieves average scores of 0.301, 0.272, and
0.241 onr p,r s, andτ, respectively, outperforming the best
baseline methods with improvements of 0.217, 0.163, and
0.141. These improvements are due to CodeVisionary’s ability
to collect multi-dimensional contextual information and pro-
vide the evaluation score through fine-grained negotiation.
Current advanced LLM-based approaches show min-
imal difference compared to V ANILLA.We observe
that state-of-the-art LLM-based approaches, ICE-SCORE
and CODEJUDGE, exhibit little difference compared to
V ANILLA. Specifically, the average scores of V ANILLA
onr p,r s, andτare 0.042, 0.091, and 0.085, respectively,
while ICE-SCORE achieves 0.039, 0.109, and 0.100, and
CODEJUDGE achieves 0.084, 0.094, and 0.089, respectively.
These results indicate that the differences are marginal. Be-
sides, V ANILLA outperforms the other two methods inr s
andτwhen evaluating responses generated by Claude-3.5-
Sonnet. These results further demonstrate that current LLM-
based methods struggle to comprehend complex code without
contextual information, which is essential for accurate and
comprehensive code evaluation.
Answer to RQ1:CodeVisionary achieves the best
performance on evaluating code generation, exceeding
the best baseline method by 0.217, 0.163, and 0.141
onr p,r s, andτ, respectively.
B. RQ2: Effectiveness of Different Stages in CodeVisionary
To answer RQ2, we explore the effectiveness of different
stages on the performance of CodeVisionary.
1) Requirement-guided Multi-dimensional Context Distil-
lation Stage:To understand the impact of this stage, we
deploy a variant of CodeVisionary without the requirement-
guided multi-dimensional context distillation stage (i.e., w/o
RMCD). The variant follows a completely free evaluation
process instead of following our designed paradigm of “en-
vironment construction”, “requirement comprehension”, “plan
formulation”, and “stepwise analysis”. As shown in Table III,
the addition of the RMCD stage achieves higher performance
onr p,r s, andτacross all three LLMs. Specifically, adding the
RMCD stage improves performance by an average of 27.0%,
32.0%, and 32.4% across the three metrics, respectively. The
RMCD stage excels in understanding diverse requirements and
formulating detailed evaluation plans, thereby ensuring the
thorough collection of multi-dimensional context.
2) Fine-grained Scoring And Summarization Stage:To
explore the contribution of this stage, we also construct a
variant of CodeVisionary without the fine-grained scoring and
summarization stage (i.e., w/o FSAS). This variant scores
the LLM-generated response multiple times and takes the
average instead of a discussion between multiple judges. As
shown in Table III, the addition of the FSAS stage achieves
higher performance onr p,r s, andτacross all three LLMs.
Specifically, adding the FSAS stage improves performance by
21.4%, 21.4%, and 19.9% on average across the three met-
rics, respectively. The FSAS stage leverages multiple judges
for negotiation, mitigating the inaccuracy of comprehending
complex code and integrating diverse opinions.

TABLE III: Impact of different stages on the performance of CodeVisionary.
Models GPT-3.5-turbo Claude-3.5-Sonnet GPT-4o A VG
Metrics rp rs τ rp rs τ rp rs τ rp rs τ
w/o RMCD0.278 0.228 0.200 0.250 0.219 0.198 0.182 0.171 0.147 0.237 0.206 0.182
,→w/o RT 0.229 0.208 0.185 0.233 0.219 0.193 0.152 0.153 0.133 0.205 0.193 0.170
,→w/o UI/UX 0.305 0.258 0.217 0.302 0.242 0.216 0.198 0.214 0.169 0.268 0.238 0.201
,→w/o ST 0.290 0.286 0.234 0.280 0.179 0.157 0.176 0.161 0.136 0.249 0.209 0.176
w/o FSAS0.282 0.233 0.204 0.262 0.250 0.227 0.201 0.189 0.172 0.248 0.224 0.201
CodeVisionary 0.325 0.286 0.247 0.317 0.278 0.262 0.262 0.253 0.214 0.301 0.272 0.241
3) Different Information in Requirement-guided Multi-
dimensional Context Distillation Stage:To further investigate
the influence of different information in the requirement-
guided multi-dimensional context distillation stage, we design
three variants by disabling different information sources: test
execution (runtime information,i.e., RT), screenshot and in-
teraction (UI/UX information), and web browsing and syntax
linters (static information,i.e., ST). As shown in Table III, dif-
ferent contextual information contributes to improvements in
evaluation accuracy. Incorporating runtime information yields
the most notable gains, improvingr p,r s, andτby 46.8%,
40.9%, and 41.8%, respectively, highlighting the strong impact
of runtime information in capturing execution anomalies and
boundary conditions. UI/UX information provides a multi-
modal understanding, leading to moderate improvements of
12.3%, 14.3%, and 19.9%, respectively. Other static infor-
mation from web browsing and syntax linters helps identify
potential code issues and provides external context, resulting
in gains of 20.9%, 30.1%, and 36.9%, respectively. Overall,
these results demonstrate that different types of information
each play a complementary role in enhancing evaluation
performance.
Answer to RQ2:Both RMCD and FSAS stages
can improve the performance of CodeVisionary. The
RMCD stage boostsr p,r s, andτby 27.0%, 32.0%,
and 32.4%, respectively, while the FSAS stage en-
hances CodeVisionary by 21.4%, 21.4%, and 19.9%,
respectively. Besides, different information in the
RMCD is essential to accurate evaluation.
C. RQ3: Influence of Hyper-parameters on the Performance
of CodeVisionary
To answer RQ3, we explore the impact of different hyper-
parameters, including the number of judges and the maximum
number of rounds during the fine-grained scoring and summa-
rization stage.
1) Number of Judges:Figure 3(a) shows the performance
of CodeVisionary with different numbers of judges. As the
number of judges increases from 2 to 3, the performance
improves notably, withr p,r s, andτincreasing from 0.321,
0.289, and 0.261 to 0.365, 0.353, and 0.303, respectively.
(a) Number of Judges
(b)
Maximum Number of Rounds
𝑟
p
𝑟
s
𝜏
0.38
0.34
0.30
0.26
2
3
5
4
2
3
5
4
0.38
0.34
0.30
0.26
Fig. 3: The influence of the number of judges and maximum
number of rounds on CodeVisionary. The horizontal axis
represents the number of judges or the maximum number of
rounds.
When the number increases to 5, the performance stabi-
lizes, indicating that further increases have a limited impact.
This suggests that three judges are sufficient to provide a
comprehensive evaluation, and additional judges struggle to
offer new insights. Considering the balance between resource
consumption and performance, we choose 3 as the optimal
number of judges.
2) Maximum Number of Rounds:Similarly, as shown in
Figure 3(b), increasing the maximum number of rounds from
2 to 3 leads to steady performance improvements, withr p,r s,
andτrising from 0.348, 0.312, and 0.268 to 0.367, 0.337,
and 0.286, respectively. This demonstrates that negotiation
allows judges to effectively share insights and mitigate biases
in understanding complex code, thereby refining their evalu-
ations. However, as the number of rounds increases from 3
to 5, the performance tends to fluctuate slightly, suggesting
that consensus has already been reached and additional rounds
bring little to no benefit. To balance resource consumption and
performance, we select 4 as the optimal number of rounds.
Answer to RQ3:The performance of CodeVisionary
is influenced by the number of judges and the max-
imum number of rounds. Our default settings of 3
judges and 4 rounds yield optimal results.

CodeVisionary
ICE
-
SCORE
CodeJudge
(b) Programming Languages
(a) Coding Scenarios
Python
JavaScript
Java
C#
C
0.8
0.6
0.4
0.2
0.0
-
0.2
Development and
Programming
Tools, Environments,
and Practices
UI

/
U
X
Emerging Technologies
and Applications
Algorithm Design
and Implementation
0.6
0.5
0.4
0.3
0.2
0.1
0.0
-
0.1
Fig. 4: Performance of CodeVisionary and baseline methods
across different coding scenarios and programming languages,
measured byr s.
TABLE IV: Counts and percentages of different actions in-
voked by CodeVisionary across all instances.
Action # Total # Per Instance %
Dynamic Execution 210 0.58 9.45
Static Linter 366 1.01 16.46
Unit Tests 84 0.23 3.78
Screenshot 76 0.21 3.42
Interaction 53 0.15 2.38
Web Browsing 325 0.90 14.62
General Semantic 652 1.80 29.33
Bash Command 343 0.94 15.43
Other 114 0.31 5.13
All 2,223 6.12 100.00
V. DISCUSSION
A. Performance on Different Coding Scenarios and Program-
ming Languages
Figure 4 illustrates the performance of CodeVisionary and
baseline methods across mainstream coding scenarios and
programming languages. As shown in Figure 4(a), Code-
Visionary generally surpasses baseline methods in different
coding scenarios. In particular, CodeVisionary improves ther s
in “UI/UX”, “Emerging Technologies and Applications”, and
“Algorithm Design and Implementation” from 0.246 to 0.543,
0.289 to 0.474, and 0.191 to 0.308, respectively. Table IV
presents the counts and percentages of various actions invoked
by CodeVisionary. In the “UI/UX” scenario, CodeVisionary
employs “Screenshot” (3.42%) and “Interaction” (2.38%) to
perform multimodal assessment of front-end code. For the
“Emerging Technologies and Applications” scenario, it can
Stepwise Evaluation Results
Step 1: Static Linter
Static Linter Analysis Overview:
The code passed all syntax and style checks
without any errors.
Detailed Static Linter Analysis:

Step 2: Dynamic Execution
Dynamic Execution Analysis:
The code runs without errors, but does not meet
the requirements:
1. It generates all combinations instead of 6
selections.
2. The output does not ensure exactly 6
selections.
Execution Command:
python /home/python_code.py
Execution Messages:
() ((2,),) ((4,),) ((5,),) ...
Step 3: Unit Test
Unit Test Analysis:
A unit test checking that all `valid_list`
elements have exactly 6 items failed, indicating
a logical error in the code...
Execution Command:
Python /home/test_python_code.py
Execution Messages:
AssertionError: List () does not contain exactly
6 elements...
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Overall Evaluation Results
Evaluation Reason:
The code does not meet user requirements due to
major logical errors. It lacks a true random
selection function and does not ...
Optimization Suggestion:
1. Strictly enforce the constraint of six
selection opportunities.
2. Add comments and docstrings to explain the
main functions.
3. Use more descriptive variable names,
especially for loop variables.
Linter Tool Linter Analysis Type Linter Analysis Message
BLACK Success Code format meets Black standards
MYPY Success No type-checking errors
PYLINT Success No code style or logical issues
Code Task
Write a Python program to generate all possible
lists by randomly selecting 1 or 2 numbers from
`[2, 4, 5, 6]` in 6 steps. Exclude lists with
more than 4 selections of 2 numbers, and
enumerate all valid results.
-----------------------------------------------------------------
LLM-generated Response
import itertools
lst = [2, 4, 5, 6]
combinations = list(itertools.combinations(lst,
1))
combinations += list(itertools.combinations(lst,
2))
valid_lists = []
for i in range(6):
chosen_combinations =
itertools.combinations(combinations, i)
for chosen in chosen_combinations:
count = sum(1 for c in chosen if len(c)
== 2)
if count <= 4:
valid_list = []
for c in chosen:
valid_list.extend(list(c))
if valid_list not in valid_lists:
valid_lists.append(valid_list)
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Evaluation Score
overall score：1
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Environment Configuration
Step 1: `python --version` Check Python version
Step 2: `python -c "import random; import
itertools; Verify required modules ...
-----------------------------------------------------------------
Task Requirements
Overall Task Requirements:
Create a Python program that randomly selects
numbers from a given list, generates lists that
meet specific conditions, and enumerates all
possible results.
Specific Task Requirements:
• Write the code in Python.
• Randomly select numbers from the list.
• Each selection can choose either 1 or 2 numbers.
Fig. 5: Example evaluation report generated by CodeVisionary.
leverage “Web Browsing” (14.62%) to acquire the latest or
specific programming knowledge. In the “Algorithm Design
and Implementation” scenario, CodeVisionary can utilize “Dy-
namic Execution” (9.45%) and “Unit Tests” (3.78%) to test
boundary cases through code execution.
Similarly, Figure 4(b) shows that CodeVisionary generally
outperforms baseline methods across different programming
languages. It achieves much higherr s in “JavaScript”, “C#”,
and “C”, increasing from 0.220 to 0.519, 0.213 to 0.473,
and -0.106 to 0.348, respectively. The strong performance
in “JavaScript” can be attributed to the domain information
gained from “Screenshot” and “Interaction”. Regarding “C”,
the negative coefficient of baseline methods highlights the
importance of execution information. Overall, these results
demonstrate that CodeVisionary effectively adapts across cod-
ing scenarios and programming languages.
B. Case Study of Evaluation Reports
As shown in Figures 5, the evaluation report begins with an
overview of the “Code Task”, the “LLM-generated Response”,
and the corresponding “Evaluation Score”. The “Environ-
ment Configuration” section outlines the environment setup,
facilitating reproducible and isolated evaluation. The “Task
Requirements” section specifies both overall and specific
requirements, enabling targeted assessment of functionality
and completeness. The “Stepwise Evaluation Results” section
provides a detailed, multi-stage assessment of the generated
code. In this example, CodeVisionary utilizes “Dynamic Exe-
cution” and “Unit Tests” to identify discrepancies between the
code execution output and the task requirements, specifically
revealing that the length of the generated list does not match

TABLE V: Comparison of performance on CoNaLa.
Metrics rp rs τ
ICE-SCORE0.6550.596 0.534
CODEJUDGE 0.544 0.491 0.444
CodeVisionary 0.6440.637 0.572
the expected length, thereby uncovering functional errors
in the code. Besides, CodeVisionary utilizes “Static Linter”
to check the code style for potential issues. The “Overall
Evaluation Results” section summarizes that the code fails to
meet requirements due to major logical errors and offers clear
suggestions, such as enforcing the six-selection limit and using
more descriptive variable names.
C. Performance on less complex benchmarks
To evaluate the performance of CodeVisionary on less com-
plex tasks, we conduct experiments on the popular CoNaLa
dataset [29]. CoNaLa is a Python code generation benchmark
consisting of 472 tasks collected from StackOverflow and
2,360 code snippets. We adopt the human annotation collected
by Evtikhiev [5] as ground truth. As shown in Table V,
CodeVisionary also achieves great performance on CoNaLa.
Specifically, CodeVisionary surpasses the best baseline method
by 0.041 and 0.038 onr s andτ, respectively. Overall, the re-
sults indicate that CodeVisionary consistently maintains effec-
tiveness across tasks with varying difficulty levels, showcasing
its adaptability and scalability.
D. Threats and Limitations
One threat to validity is that our benchmark may not
cover all coding scenarios and programming languages. Hence,
the experimental results may not be fully generalizable. In
the future, we intend to extend our benchmark to include
more. Another threat arises from the inherent randomness of
LLMs. Since CodeVisionary relies on LLM agents to evaluate
and score responses, the results may vary across trials. We
therefore perform multiple trials and take the average as the
experimental results.
VI. RELATEDWORK
A. Code Generation Evaluation
Current approaches for code generation evaluation can be
categorized into metric-based, human-centered, and LLM-
based. Early works directly transfer evaluation metrics from
the natural language processing (NLP) domain to code gener-
ation, such as BLEU [7], ROUGE [30], and METEOR [31].
However, these metrics fail to capture the syntactic and func-
tional correctness. To mitigate this limitation, CodeBLEU [8]
incorporates syntactic and semantic information from Abstract
Syntax Trees (AST) and Data Flow Graphs (DFG). Recently,
execution-based metrics have gained prominence, including
pass@k [9] and pass@t [10]. However, these metrics are based
on high-quality unit tests and are limited to executable code.
For more complex and diverse tasks [32], [33], human-
centered approaches become particularly important. Human
evaluators can provide reliable and accurate evaluations based
on their professional knowledge and programming experi-
ence, which are also essential for fine-tuning LLMs to bet-
ter align with human preferences [34]. However, human-
centered approaches are labour-intensive. Recently, LLM-
based approaches [35] leverage LLMs to simulate the human
evaluation process, enhancing efficiency and scalability. ICE-
Score [14] aligns well with human preferences in terms of code
accuracy and functionality without test oracles or references.
CODEJUDGE [15] employs a “slow thinking” approach,
enabling a thorough and reliable assessment of code’s semantic
correctness. Nevertheless, these LLM-based approaches still
face limitations, including a lack of multi-dimensional context
and omission of certain issues in complex code.
B. LLM-Based Agents
AI agents are artificial entities capable of accomplishing
complex tasks by perceiving the environment and taking ac-
tions [36], [37]. Recently, rapid progress in LLMs has greatly
increased researchers’ attention to LLM-based agents [38],
[39]. LLM-based agent frameworks leverage LLM as the cen-
tral controller to address complex tasks by integrating external
tools and powerful understanding capabilities of LLMs. These
agents typically consist of four core components: planning,
memory, perception, and action [36]. The planning component
ensures efficient task execution through strategies such as
single or multi-planner approaches [40], [41] and single or
multi-turn planning [42], [43]. The memory component retains
historical data to support reasoning, with implementations
ranging from short-term to long-term memory [44], [45], as
well as specific or shared memory [46], [47]. The perception
component enables agents to process textual inputs [45], [48]
and visual data [49], [50]. The action component integrates
external tools [51], [52] for tasks such as web searches,
file operations, and GUI interactions, thereby extending the
agents’ functional capabilities.
LLM-based agent frameworks designed for software en-
gineering have demonstrated superior performance across
various software development and maintenance tasks [53]–
[57], including requirements engineering [17], [58], code
generation [18], [59], static bug detection [19], [60], code
review [61], [62], unit testing [63], system testing [45], [64],
fault localization [65], [66], program repair [67], end-to-
end software development [68], [69] and end-to-end software
maintenance [70].
VII. CONCLUSION
This paper focuses on evaluating code generation for
complex code scenarios and proposes a novel agent-based
evaluation framework, named CodeVisionary. CodeVisionary
consists of a requirement-guided multi-dimensional context
distillation stage for gathering multi-dimensional contextual
information based on the decomposed task requirements and

stepwise evaluation plan, and a fine-grained scoring and sum-
marization stage for employing multiple judges engaging in
discussions to better comprehend complex code in a fine-
grained manner, finally reaching a consensus on the evaluation
score. Besides, we provide detailed evaluation reports assisting
developers in identifying shortcomings. Compared with the
state-of-the-art approaches, the experimental results validate
the effectiveness of CodeVisionary. In the future, we intend to
further evaluate CodeVisionary on a broader range of datasets.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This research is supported by the National Natural Sci-
ence Foundation of China under project (No. 62472126,
62276075), Natural Science Foundation of Guangdong
Province (Project No. 2023A1515011959), and Shenzhen-
Hong Kong Jointly Funded Project (Category A, No.
SGDX20230116 091246007).
