record_id: s2_snowball:b350854918208ed491e524416caa6aae9c440659
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2607.11818
fetched_title: MM-ToolSandBox: A Unified Framework forEvaluating Visual Tool-Calling Agents
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:01:00Z

MM-ToolSandBox: A Unified Framework forEvaluating Visual Tool-Calling Agents
Kaixin Ma∗, Di Feng∗, Alexander Metz, Jiarui Lu, Eshan Verma, Afshin Dehghan
Apple
∗Equal Contribution
We introduceMM-ToolSandBox, a benchmark and evaluation framework for visually grounded tool-calling agents. The
framework provides a stateful execution environment spanning 500+ tools across 16 application domains, supporting
multi-image, multi-turn tasks where agents must ground progressively arriving visual inputs into executable tool calls
while handling realistic conversational phenomena (goal revisions, error corrections, state mutations). An automated
scenario generation pipeline produces diverse, visually grounded scenarios through information-flow-guided planning
and multi-stage quality filtering, yielding258human-verified nominal scenarios and50variants targeting interactive UI
applications. Evaluating12state-of-the-art models, from4B open-weight to frontier proprietary systems, shows that
current models still lack robust visual tool-calling capability: even the best model achieves below50%success rate.
Our failure analysis further reveals that visual precision, not only planning, is a primary bottleneck for capable models:
53%of failures stem from incorrect information extraction from images despite otherwise correct task workflows. A
planning-to-precision crossover emerges with scale: smaller models fail at decidingwhat to do, while larger models fail
at perceivingwhat they see, suggesting fundamentally different research directions for improving models at different
capability levels. The framework and the benchmark are publicly available at https://github.com/apple/ml-mmtoolsandbox.
Date:August 24, 2026
1 Introduction
Evaluating LLM-based agents on tool-augmented tasks has become an active area of research, with benchmarks
targeting function calling (Li et al., 2023; Patil et al., 2025), stateful environment interaction (Lu et al., 2025;
Trivedi et al., 2024), and multi-turn conversational dynamics (Froger et al., 2026; Barres et al., 2025; Xiu
et al., 2026). However, most of these frameworks remain text-centric, and cannot evaluate many realistic
assistant tasks with visual inputs, for example, a user may share a screenshot to diagnose an issue or provide
a photo of an event poster to schedule an event.
Solving visual tool-calling tasks requires more than visual recognition. The agent must extract task-relevant
information from images, map visual evidence to the correct tool or code action, execute that action against a
stateful environment, and continue the interaction when the user’s intent evolves. This makes visual tool
calling a distinct agentic capability: the model must not only understand what is shown, but also decide how
to act on it through tools.
Among the few benchmarks that incorporate visual inputs, images are typically provided as a static prefix in
the initial query (Wang et al., 2024a), or the tasks are limited to single-round user-agent interactions (Xie
et al., 2024; Rawles et al., 2025). Moreover, many existing benchmarks operate with relatively small tool
spaces, often containing only15–100tools (Froger et al., 2026; Wang et al., 2024a; Kong et al., 2025; Lu
et al., 2025). As a result, there is no unified framework and benchmark for systematically studying the visual
tool-calling capability of multimodal agents under dynamic, multi-turn, and large-tool-space settings.
To close this gap, we introduceMM-ToolSandBox, a diverse simulation framework for evaluating visual
tool-calling agents. MM-ToolSandBox extends the stateful tool-use environments from ToolSandBox (Lu
et al., 2025), with explicit image handling, visual-specific tools, and support for both structured tool-use
1
arXiv:2607.11818v2 [cs.CV] 21 Aug 2026

and code-execution interfaces, as summarized in Figure 1. Built on top of this framework, we construct a
visual tool-calling benchmark designed to capture the key challenges missing from prior work. The benchmark
spans511tools across16simulated application domains and is organized along three orthogonal axes: seven
information-flow types, four challenge types that model realistic conversational deviations, and four image-
arrival patterns that control when visual inputs enter the interaction. The resulting benchmark contains
258nominal scenarios with1 ,284unique images, requiring agents to perform multi-image, multi-turn tool
use over a large and diverse tool space. All scenarios are further corrected and verified by human experts
to ensure reliable visual grounding, executable task specifications, and well-defined completion criteria. We
also curate50scenarios to explore interactive UI applications. To make benchmark construction scalable
while maintaining high quality, we develop an automated scenario generation pipeline. The pipeline produces
visually grounded scenarios through information-flow-guided planning, environment-state instantiation, and
multi-stage quality filtering, reducing the annotation burden from full manual construction to targeted human
review. Finally, we conduct a systematic evaluation of state-of-the-art proprietary and open-weight models on
our benchmark. Our results show that even strong frontier models struggle substantially with visual tool
calling, revealing persistent gaps in image-grounded reasoning, multi-step interaction, and stateful tool use.
In-depth analysis further shows that multi-image working memory is a key bottleneck, and that models of
different scales exhibit distinct failure patterns.
To summarize, our contributions are the following. 1. A stateful, diverse, multimodal agent simulation
framework. We substantially extend ToolSandbox (Lu et al., 2025), a text-only environment with34tools, into
a multimodal runtime with persistent image artifacts that remain addressable across turns, dynamic image
arrival during the conversation,511tools across16application domains with on-demand tool discovery, both
code-execution and structured tool-use interfaces, and deterministic entity-diff verification for multimodal
tasks. 2. An automated scenario-generation pipeline. The pipeline performs information-flow-guided planning,
expands outlines into realistic multi-image, multi-turn interactions with executable environment states. In
this way, we reduce benchmark construction from full manual authoring to targeted human review. 3. A
human-verified benchmark and new empirical findings. Beyond leaderboard results, our analysis reveals
a planning-to-precision failure crossover with model scale, in which smaller models fail predominantly at
planning while stronger models increasingly fail at visual precision, and identifies multi-image working memory
as a major bottleneck, with upfront image arrival roughly20points harder than progressive arrival.
We release the benchmark and the framework to the public athttps://github.com/apple/ml-mmtoolsandbox.
2 Related Work
Tool-use agent benchmarks.A growing body of benchmarks evaluate LLM agents on tool-augmented
tasks. API-Bank (Li et al., 2023) and BFCL (Patil et al., 2025) target single- and multi-turn function
calling with large API collections. ToolSandbox (Lu et al., 2025) introduces stateful environments with
online evaluation and conversational simulation. AppWorld (Trivedi et al., 2024) scales to 457 APIs across
9 applications with rich relational data, though exclusively in a code-execution paradigm. More recent
efforts push toward dynamic environments: Gaia2 (Froger et al., 2026) introduces asynchronous, event-driven
evaluation testing temporal awareness and agent-to-agent collaboration;τ 2-Bench (Barres et al., 2025) models
agent-supervisor interactions revealing communication as a critical bottleneck; and ASTRA-bench (Xiu et al.,
2026) grounds evaluation in longitudinal personal context. GTA (Wang et al., 2024a) is among the first
to incorporate multimodal contexts, but covers only 14 tools in a stateless setting. SO-Bench (Feng et al.,
2026) evaluates the visual structural output capability of tool-use agents, but only focuses on single-turn
interactions. Toolathlon (Li et al., 2025a) further scales tool-use evaluation to long-horizon real-software
workflows, spanning 32 software applications and 604 tools with realistic initial states and execution-based
task verification. MCP-Atlas (Bandi et al., 2026) evaluates agents on 1,000 multi-step tasks over 36 real
MCP servers and 220 tools, requiring agents to discover and orchestrate 3–6 tool calls across servers from
natural-language instructions. Despite this progress, these benchmarks operate predominantly in text-only
regimes, evaluate under a single execution mode, and rely heavily on manual scenario construction.
Multimodal tool-use agent benchmarks.A closer line of work evaluates agents that call tools over visual
inputs. VisualToolBench (Guo et al., 2025), TIR-Bench (Li et al., 2025c), Agent-X (Ashraf et al., 2026)
and AgentVista (Su et al., 2026) benchmark multimodal tool-using agents over a curated tool suite. These
2

Environment
Messages ShoppingNotes FilesMusic
Application Domains (16)
…
Entity Database
Images
Documents
Contacts
Mails
Transactions
Service-providers
…
Toolbox Abstraction
Mini
(+30)
Same underlaying functionalities, different
levels of consolidation.
Execution Mode
Item 0: Banana
Item 1: Milk
I should check the items
I should check the
items
lookup(domains=“Shopping)
compute_price([0,1])
Tool-use Code execution
Search tools
UI tools
Vision tools
…
Medium
(+250)
Full set
(+500)
}
Pay
Evaluation
Agent Judge
User Judge
State Verification
Column Expected Actual Similarity Score
user_id 2 2 Exact 1.00
prod_id 201 201 Exact 1.00
Quantity 1 1 Exact 1.00
Title Andy’s ListAndy Fuzzy 0.65
Check Criterion Evidence
✅ Task completion The agent correctly
found the items in
the shopping…
✅ Tool-use validity …
✅ Instruction following …
❌ No-side effects …
✅ Information correctness …
Check Criterion Evidence
✅ Request fidelity …
✅ Conversational
naturalness
The user uses
natural language …
✅ Grounded consistency …
✅ Tool-use validity …
Multimodal Trajectory
Agent User
Hey! Which of these items
are in my shopping list?
The first two.
How much do they sell online?
BTW, This also looks great!
Add it to my list.
I found one banana and milk in the
shopping app. They cost 14.99$.
Added!
I found two types of
pineapples, which one
do you prefer?
Figure 1Overview of the MM-ToolSandBox framework for evaluating visual tool-calling agents. The framework
supports multi-turn, multi-image interaction between the user and agent, and provides both structured tool-use and
code-execution interfaces. The framework includes over500native tools across16application domains, covering search,
UI, vision, and system-level utilities. Evaluation combines rubric-based LLM judges for both agent and user roles with
static state-verification checks.
benchmarks establish that visual tool use is a distinct capability worth measuring, but they are predominantly
single-turn and stateless, formulated as question answering, supply images as a static prefix to the task, and
operate over a fairly small tool spaces. MM-ToolSandBox complements existing benchmarks with: a stateful
environment in which tool calls mutate persistent world state, multi-turn interaction with a simulated user
whose intent can change, dynamic image arrival across turns rather than a fixed visual prefix, a large tool
space with over500tools dual code-execution and structured tool-use interfaces, and evaluation by entity-level
state verification rather than answer matching.
Visual agent benchmarks.A parallel line evaluates agents that perceive and act on GUI inputs, known
as GUI agents (Wang et al., 2025; Li et al., 2025e; Yang et al., 2025). VisualWebArena (Koh et al., 2024)
and WebVoyager (He et al., 2024) evaluate web navigation grounded in visual page understanding. At the
OS level, OSWorld (Xie et al., 2024), AndroidWorld (Rawles et al., 2025) and UINavBench (Agrawal et al.,
2025) benchmark desktop and mobile tasks, respectively, while MobileWorld (Kong et al., 2025) extends to
long-horizon cross-application workflows. In multimodal search, MMSearch (Jiang et al., 2024) and MM-
BrowseComp (Li et al., 2025d) evaluate deep retrieval requiring visual-language reasoning. These benchmarks
share grounding in visual perception but differ in image types (UI screenshots vs. natural images), action spaces
(GUI operations vs. API calls), and evaluation (navigation success vs. state verification). Our work occupies a
complementary position: agents perceive heterogeneous visual inputs (ranging from natural photographs to
documents, charts, and UI screenshots) shared during conversation and must translate them into high-level
API tool calls within a stateful, multi-domain environment, testing the perception-to-tool-invocation pipeline
rather than pixel-level UI manipulation.
A feature comparison with prior benchmarks is in Table 1.
3 MM-ToolSandBox
MM-ToolSandBox aims to measure visual tool-calling capability: whether an agent can understand visual
context, decide which tools (or code) are needed, use visual artifacts correctly across turns, and complete
tasks through grounded, multi-step interaction. To this end, MM-ToolSandBox inherits the lightweight,
interactive, and robust design philosophy of ToolSandbox (Lu et al., 2025), while extending text-based tool-use
environments to visual settings through explicit visual artifact handling. To support richer and more dynamic
3

Table 1Comparison of representative tool-use agent benchmarks and environments.Visualindicates whether image or
UI observations are part of the input.Scenariodistinguishes single-turn tasks, where the user provides a complete
goal upfront and the agent executes autonomously, from multi-turn tasks, where the agent must interact with the user
to resolve ambiguity, obtain missing information, or handle user updates.Env.describes the execution substrate,
whileExec.specifies the agent interface: Tool denotes structured function/tool calling, Code denotes executable
code generation in a runtime such as a Python environment, and UI+Tool denotes hybrid interaction through both
graphical interfaces and external tools.
Benchmark Visual Scenario Environment Execution Apps/Domains T ools
AppWorld (Trivedi et al., 2024)✗single-turn API sim. Code mobile apps (9) 457
Toolathlon (Li et al., 2025a)✗single-turn MCP/server Tool software apps (32) 604
MCP-Atlas (Bandi et al., 2026)✗single-turn MCP/server Tool mixed domains (36) 220
ToolSandbox (Lu et al., 2025)✗multi-turn API sim. Tool mobile apps (11) 34
Gaia2 (Froger et al., 2026)✗multi-turn API sim. Tool service apps 101
ASTRA-bench (Xiu et al., 2026)✗multi-turn API sim. Tool mobile apps 51
τ 2-Bench (Barres et al., 2025)✗multi-turn API sim. Tool telecom support 30
GTA (Wang et al., 2024a)✓single-turn tool suite Tool vision/web tasks 14
VisualToolBench (Guo et al., 2025)✓single+multi tool suite Tool vision tasks 6
TIR-Bench (Li et al., 2025c)✓single N/A Optional vision tasks N/A
Agent-X (Ashraf et al., 2026)✓single-turn tool suite Tool vision/web tasks 14
AgentVista (Su et al., 2026)✓single-turn tool suite Tool vision/web tasks 4
OSWorld-MCP (Jia et al., 2025)✓single-turn OS/UI UI+Tool desktop apps (7) 158
MobileWorld (Kong et al., 2025)✓multi-turn OS/UI UI+Tool mobile apps 64
MM-T oolSandBox✓multi-turn API sim. Tool+Code mobile apps (16)511
assistant scenarios, we further incorporate domains and tools from AppWorld (Trivedi et al., 2024), resulting
in16simulated application domains and511native Python tools. Together, these design choices make
MM-ToolSandBox a generic runtime for prototyping diverse multimodal tool-calling scenarios. Figure 1
provides an overview of our system design.
3.1 Architecture
Each episode is parameterized by ascenario, which specifies the initial and expected world states, available
tools, user instructions, associated visual assets, and completion criteria. The interaction then unfolds among
anagent, auser, and anexecution environment. An LLM plays the simulated user, the agent acts as
the task solver (under evaluation), and the environment maintains the shared world state while executing
tool calls. The interactions among agent, user and environment operate over two channels. The front-end
interaction between the agent and user is a natural user-assistant dialogue, while the backend interaction with
the environment is mediated through typed tool calls.
Tool Management.Tools are implemented as native Python functions with typed signatures and metadata
such as role visibility and state dependencies (Lu et al., 2025). Because we provide over500tools in MM-
ToolSandBox, exposing the full registry in a single prompt is impractical. We therefore provide a tool-discovery
meta-tool, search_tool, which retrieves relevant tools on demand from a natural-language query over tool
documentation. Retrieved tools are added to the agent’s active set, while a least-recently-used (LRU) eviction
policy keeps the working set bounded. To further test tool-use robustness under varying registry sizes, we
curate three additional variants from the full native toolset: a medium set with276tools, a compact set with
165tools, and a mini set with30tools.
3.2 Multimodal Interaction
Multimodal interaction is the main focus of this work. Building on the message-passing and world-state design
of ToolSandbox (Lu et al., 2025), we treat images as first-class visual artifacts rather than static prompt
attachments. Each image is stored in a shared image database, assigned a stable identifier, and referenced by
tools and messages in the same way that other environment entities are referenced. This design makes visual
artifacts persistent, reusable, and traceable across turns. Image exchange is mediated through tool calls. For
4

example, the user can provide images to the agent during the conversation viasend_message_with_image,
and the agent can similarly return visual artifacts to the user when needed. We further provide visual-specific
tools and other utilities for resizing, annotating, plotting, transforming images, as well as interactive UI
generation; the complete list of visual tools is given in Appendix D.5. Note that our benchmark does not
prescribe the use of any particular visual tool: cropping, resizing, rotation, and enhancement are available,
but whether to invoke them is left to the agent’s own judgment rather than being mandated in the system
prompt. As a result, images become part of the structured interaction trajectory rather than untracked
context-window inputs. An example is shown in Figure 1.
3.3 Execution Modes
MM-ToolSandBox implements two execution modes for invoking tools: free-formCode-Executionand
structuredTool-Use. InCode-Executionmode, the model operates through standard chat completion and
writes Python code in markdown-fenced blocks, following the code-as-action paradigm (Trivedi et al., 2024;
Wang et al., 2024b). The framework parses and executes the code in a persistent sandboxed interpreter, where
registered tools are available as callable Python functions. This interface naturally supports complex workflows
involving loops, conditionals, intermediate variables, and flexible tool composition, with the drawback of
reduced structural constraints. InTool-Usemode, the model operates through the provider’s structured
tool-calling API, as commonly supported by OpenAI, Anthropic, and Gemini (OpenAI, 2025; Anthropic,
2026; Gemini, 2025). At each step, the model either responds to the user or emits a schema-constrained tool
call that is executed by the environment. This interface is easy to parse, auditable, and robust to malformed
outputs, but can be cumbersome for complex control flow or multi-tool composition. To support programmatic
orchestration in this mode, we provide anexecute_code tool that invokes the same sandboxed interpreter,
and code execution remains mediated by the structured tool-calling interface.
Safety Guardrails.Executing agent-generated Python code requires careful protection regardless of how
the code is invoked. Following the spirit of AppWorld’s sandboxed execution design (Trivedi et al., 2024),
MM-ToolSandBox protects the interpreter with three layers of guardrails: (1) static checks that reject
disallowed imports and unsafe primitives before execution; (2) runtime restrictions that limit file access,
intercept dangerous system calls, and cap memory usage; and (3) execution limits on wall-clock time and
output size.
3.4 Evaluation
MM-ToolSandBox evaluates scenarios through two complementary mechanisms (illustrated on the right of
Figure 1).State-based verificationcompares initial and final world-state snapshots against a scenario’s
expected entity changes, providing an objective, reproducible outcome signal.Rubric-based LLM judges
assess trajectory quality for both roles: an Agent Judge evaluates whether the agent completed the task
correctly, while a User Judge checks whether the simulated user behaved coherently. Together, these
mechanisms cover both the outcome and the process of each scenario. Concrete metrics are defined in
Section 4.3.
4 Benchmark
The MM-ToolSandBox benchmark comprises 258 human-verified scenarios spanning diverse visual reasoning
patterns, conversational challenges, and application domains. Each scenario specifies a multi-turn, multi-image
task that requires the agent to extract information from visual inputs, navigate a large tool space, and produce
correct state changes in a simulated device environment. We describe the design dimensions that structure
the benchmark, followed by its composition and statistics. In addition, we curate50variants for interactive
UI applications. A scenario example is shown in Figure 2. More examples can be found in Appendix F.
4.1 Design Dimensions
We structure the benchmark along three orthogonal axes, namely, information flow type, challenge type,
and image arrival pattern, that jointly control the reasoning pattern, conversational dynamics, and visual
5

Figure 2Example scenario illustrating the interplay of benchmark design dimensions. The agent must (1) extract
numerical information from product images (visual grounding), (2) perform arithmetic to determine quantities (compute
flow type), (3) adapt when the user changes plans mid-conversation (goal change challenge), and (4) handle images
arriving across turns (progressive arrival). Evaluation verifies the final cart state against expected entity diffs.
complexity of each scenario.
Information flow types.The flow type prescribes the reasoning pattern connecting visual inputs to tool
actions. We derive seven flow types by systematically decomposing the space of operations that relate multiple
information sources to action outputs, grounding our taxonomy in data processing primitives:aggregate(cf.
union): combine information from multiple sources into a single action;compare(cf.argmax): evaluate
alternatives against criteria to select the best;filter(cf.where): select a subset of items matching a condition;
compute(cf. derived column): derive a new value from inputs through calculation;validate(cf.check):
verify information against constraints before acting;lookup chain(cf. correlated subquery): resolve references
sequentially, each feeding the next; andcross-reference(cf.join): match information across sources and
act on the correspondence. These flow types impose genuinely different reasoning demands, e.g. lookup
chains require sequential retrieval from individual images, while filter and aggregate tasks require synthesizing
information across multiple images simultaneously.
Challenge types.We control for two dimensions of task difficulty beyond the cooperative baseline. First,
two conversational challenges test agent robustness to imperfect user behavior:goal change: the user pivots
mid-conversation, requiring the agent to abandon prior progress and adapt to revised objectives; anderror
correction: the user provides incorrect details (e.g., misidentifying content in an image), testing whether
the agent detects discrepancies between visual evidence and user instructions rather than executing blindly.
Second, state mutation controls operational complexity by requiring the agent to update or delete existing
entities rather than only creating new ones, demanding entity retrieval and grounded modification instead
of unconstrained creation. Scenarios without any of these properties form the cooperative baseline with
create-only operations.
Image arrival patterns.The arrival pattern determines when images enter the conversation:upfront: all
images in the first message,progressive: images distributed across turns,late: images arriving toward the
end, ormixed: a combination of the three. Progressive delivery tests whether agents can integrate new visual
context as the interaction evolves, while upfront delivery tests simultaneous multi-image working memory,
which is a fundamentally different cognitive demand.
6

4.2 Benchmark Composition
Image sources.We sourced images from the test sets of eight established vision datasets spanning
complementary visual domains: documents (DocVQA (Mathew et al., 2020), OmniDocBench (Ouyang
et al., 2025)), natural scene text (HierText (Long et al., 2023)), real-world scenes (WorldVQA (Zhou et al.,
2026)), charts and plots (ChartQA-Pro (Masry et al., 2025), ChartMuseum (Tang et al., 2025)), infographics
(InfographicVQA (Mathew et al., 2021)), and software UI screenshots (ScreenSpotPro (Li et al., 2025b)). This
diversity ensures that benchmark performance reflects general visual perception rather than proficiency on a
single image type. Given the image set, we leverage our automatic scenario generation pipeline to produce a
diverse and challenging scenario set (detailed in Section 5). Each scenario requires 3–6 images and 2–5 user
interaction rounds. In total we cover 1,284 unique images over 258 scenarios, and the distribution of design
dimensions is shown in Figure 4.
UI mode subset.We additionally convert a 50-scenario subset to UI mode, where the same underlying tasks
must be completed through visual interface interaction rather than text. In this mode, the agent acts as a
dynamic UI designer: it discovers backend tools, gathers information, and renders interactive screens (product
cards, selection lists, confirmation dialogs) through which the user makes decisions via button clicks and
selections. The key design principle is that the user’s decision criterion is private, so the agent cannot complete
the task without presenting options and receiving the user’s choice through the UI. Entity diff specifications
remain identical, ensuring that the same programmatic evaluation applies regardless of interaction modality.
A third judge (UI judge) additionally evaluates whether the agent rendered appropriate interactive interfaces
with correct affordances. A converted UI scenario is shown in Figure 9.
To support interactive UI scenarios, we implement a set of dedicated UI tools that mediate structured visual
interactions between the agent, the user, and the environment acting as a UI state server (Figure 3). On the
frontend, the agent and the user continue to communicate in natural language as in any other scenario. On the
backend, the agent constructs a declarative UI description and calls a rendering tool; the environment validates,
renders, and stores the resulting screen, then delivers it to the user together with metadata describing the
available interactive elements. The user can then perform actions such as clicking a button or filling a form
field through a dedicated interaction tool, and the environment resolves the action into structured data that
is forwarded back to the agent as a notification. This design keeps the conversational surface natural and
readable while making every UI state change auditable through typed tool calls. UI tools are built based on
the recently published A2UI protocol (Google, 2025a). Figure 3 demonstrates the information flow for UI
interaction.
4.3 Evaluation Protocol
By default, we use GPT-5.4 (OpenAI, 2026) to build the user simulator, as we find that this model achieves
the highest user fidelity and natural conversation compared to other frontier models. The prompts for both
user and agent roles are provided in Appendix E.1 and Appendix E.2.
Agent implementation.To isolate model capability from scaffolding, all models share a single fixed harness
(Yao et al., 2023; Wang et al., 2024b). Unless otherwise noted, the agent runs in the pure code-execution
interface (Section 3.3): it operates a persistent sandboxed Python interpreter, discovers tools on demand from
the full511-tool registry via a discovery tool under an LRU working set, and is capped at100interaction
steps (across agent and user roles) with a per-scenario wall-clock time limit. Native thinking is enabled
for models that support it. Every model receives the same agent-role system prompt (Appendix E.1) and
interacts with the same GPT-5.4 (OpenAI, 2026) user simulator, and all trajectories are scored by a Claude
4.5 Sonnet (Anthropic, 2025a) rubric judge. We hold this harness fixed on purpose: as agent scaffolding
increasingly drives end-task performance (Anthropic, 2025; OpenAI, 2026), comparing models under a common,
well-specified harness is what makes performance differences attributable to the model rather than to the
surrounding system. We separately study how the interface itself affects performance in Section 6.3.
Evaluator.Each scenario is scored using the mechanisms described in Section 3.4.Agent Success Rate
(Agent SR)is the primary metric: the agent judge receives the full conversation trajectory and tool calls with
results and then evaluates five independent criteria: task completion, instruction following, tool use validity,
no side effects, and information accuracy, and a scenario passes only if all five pass. The complete agent-judge
7

Agent Environment User
Find restaurants like this one (photo attached)
(1)
render_ui_screen(restaurant_ui)
(2)
<env> Rendered image + interactive elements
(3)
show_ui_to_user()
(4)
<env> UI screenshot + clickable element info
(5)
Here are similar restaurants with ocean views!
(6)
ui_user_interact("restaurant_ui", "book-btn")
(7)
<env> User clicked "Book" on Ocean Pearl
(8)
Booking confirmed for Ocean Pearl!
(9)
User-Agent
Tool call
Tool result
Env-User
User-Env
Env-Agent
Agent active
Agent waiting
Figure 3An example information flow for an interactive UI scenario. The user simulator and agent interact through
natural language on the front end, while both interact with the UI server environment through dedicated UI tools on
the back end. The agent generates a new UI screen by writing Python code following the A2UI protocol, which is
executed throughrender_ui_screen. The environment renders the resulting UI screen and returns it to the user role as
an environment message. The user simulator then observes the screen and interacts with it throughui_user_interact,
emulating common UI actions such as clicking and typing.
rubric prompt is provided in Appendix E.3.Entity F1provides graded partial credit by programmatically
comparing actual entity state changes against expected specifications via Hungarian matching with type-aware
column similarity (exact match for identifiers, ROUGE-L for text, datetime verification for timestamps; full
details in Appendix A). Note that the two metrics are complementary by construction and can diverge:
Entity F1 askshow close is the final state?, tolerating a misread name or one wrong field, whereas Agent
SR is a conjunctive gate askingdid the agent do everything correctly?. We analyze where they disagree
in Appendix D.2.User SRassesses whether the simulated user behaved coherently, serving as a sanity
check that user quality does not confound agent evaluation (user-judge rubric in Appendix E.4). We show in
Section C.1 that User SR correlates strongly with Agent SR and that excluding user-failing scenarios does not
alter model rankings, confirming that reported performance differences reflect genuine agent capability.
Judge model selection.We use Claude 4.5 Sonnet (Anthropic, 2025a) as the default judge. Among the
proprietary candidates we compared during judge development (Claude 4.5 Sonnet, GPT-5.4, Gemini 3.0
Flash) it attains the highest agreement with human experts while also being the mostconservative, i.e., it has
the lowest false-positive rate and therefore under- rather than over-estimates Agent SR. See Appendix B for
8

Figure 4Overview of the scenario generation pipeline (top) and the resulting benchmark distribution (bottom).
T op:Each candidate image is first associated with relevant application domains and tools (Stage 1), then grouped
via CLIP-based clustering and screened for viable information-flow types and image-arrival patterns (Stage 2). A
structured multi-round outline is sampled from the viable patterns and assigned a challenge type (Stage 3), then
expanded into a full multi-turn dialogue with deictic visual references and tool calls (Stage 4). Stage 5 instantiates
the initial environment state together with the expected final state for deterministic state-based evaluation. Stage 6
applies LLM-based quality criteria, followed by an oracle agent solvability check and human expert review.Bottom:
Distribution of the258final scenarios across the three design dimensions of Section 4.1, flow types, image-arrival
patterns, and challenge types, together with the originating image-source datasets.
our human-judge model agreement study.
Evaluation validity.We validate judging fidelity against human annotation. Three expert annotators
independently labelled the same100trajectories, reaching substantial inter-annotator agreement (Fleiss’
κ = 0.782, mean pairwise Cohen’sκ = 0.782), which establishes that the labelling task itself is reliable. Against
the majority-vote human label, the agent judge achieves86%agreement (Cohen’sκ = 0.709, substantial)
with only2false positives among56human-negative trajectories (FPR= 0 .036). Importantly, the judge
is miscalibrated in the conservative direction: it passes34%of the sampled trajectories where the human
majority passes44%, so reported Agent SR should be read as a lower bound on true performance rather
than an unbiased estimate. The user judge attains high raw agreement (77%) though a lowerκ driven by the
rarity of user-simulation failures. We further re-score every trajectory with two additional judges drawn from
different model families, Gemini 3.0 Flash and the open-weight Qwen 3.5-397B-A17B, and find model rankings
essentially unchanged (Spearmanρ = 0.95–0.99), with no evidence that the Sonnet judge favors Claude-family
agents (Appendix C.2). Our conclusions therefore do not hinge on the choice of judge. Repeating the judge on
fixed trajectories and repeating full agent rollouts both yield standard deviations below1.3%(Appendix C.3),
well below the gaps between performance tiers. Together with the strong Agent-SR/User-SR correlation
(r= 0.81, Figure 6a), this indicates that both the user simulator and the judges are reliable.
5 Scenario Generation Pipeline
We design an automated pipeline that generates multi-image, multi-turn scenarios at scale while satisfying
the design dimensions defined in Section 4.1. The pipeline operates in six stages (Figure 4), producing the
benchmark described in Section 4. All LLM-based stages use Gemini-3.1-Pro (Google, 2026), which we
selected in early pilot studies for its strong multimodal understanding and, critically, its reliability at emitting
schema-conformant environment entities, a prerequisite for the complex entity staging required in Stage 5.
We probe the effect of this choice with a generator ablation in Appendix D.1.
Stage 1: Image–tool association.Not all images naturally motivate tool use. Given an image sourced
from the image corpus, an LLM identifies whether it contains genuinely actionable content and maps it to
relevant application domains and specific tool functions. Strict filtering ensures only images requiring both
9

visual extraction and tool invocation, where the task cannot be accomplished without the image, pass to
downstream stages.
Stage 2: Image clustering and flow type selection.Randomly grouping images produces forced, artificial
scenarios. We instead first group images by associated domains and then cluster them into groups of 3-6
using CLIP embedding similarity, ensuring high relevance within each group. For each cluster, we assess the
feasibility of each information flow type and image arrival pattern (defined in Section 4.1). A lightweight
viability assessment scores each flow type and each arrival pattern for the cluster (0-3: impossible to ideal);
only natural fits (score≥ 2) are retained. Without this pre-selection, we observe that the LLM defaults to the
simplest viable pattern, collapsing reasoning diversity.
Stage 3: Outline generation.Before generating the full scenario, the pipeline produces a structured
outline by selecting from the acceptable flow types and image arrival patterns identified in Stage 2, with
weighted sampling that steers toward a balanced distribution across the benchmark. The outline specifies the
number of user rounds (2–5), the selected flow type and arrival pattern, required tools, and a challenge type
(Section 4.1).
Stage 4: Scenario generation.The outline is expanded into a full scenario using flow-type-specific prompt
templates that encode the assigned information flow structure, ensuring genuine multi-step reasoning rather
than independent parallel actions. The output includes per-turn user queries with deictic references to visual
content, transition conditions governing when new images or corrections are introduced, a goal with all
references resolved to concrete values for automated evaluation, andpreexisting entity requirements, the data
that must exist in the environment for the scenario to be valid (e.g., existing calendar events, contacts, or
email threads). A user profile sampled from a pool of synthetic personas provides realistic social context for
scenarios involving personalized information.
Stage 5: Entity generation.Stateful evaluation requires fully specified environment state. Using the
preexisting entity requirements from Stage 4, an LLM instantiatesinitial entities(concrete data populating
the env so the scenario is valid) andfinal entities(the expected env state after successful completion, including
created, modified, and deleted entities), enabling deterministic evaluation by diffing actual post-execution
state against the expected outcome.
Stage 6: Automated quality filtering.Each scenario is evaluated by an LLM critic against seven quality
criteria: multimodal necessity, visual realism, self-containment, conversation step integrity, goal flexibility,
visual grounding accuracy, and scenario plausibility. Scenarios passing all criteria then undergo balanced
downsampling to maintain diversity across design dimensions of Section 4.1. The downsampled set is then
validated for solvability and entity correctness through the verification protocol described in Section 5.1.
5.1 Quality Verification
To verify that every released scenario is executable end-to-end, not merely well-formed, we add a final layer
on top of Stage 6 filtering, combining an oracle rollout check and human expert review.
Oracle solvability check.For every scenario, we run an oracle agent whose system prompt is augmented
with ground-truth information: the expected entity state changes, the task completion criteria, and the
list of expected tools. We default to Claude 4.5 Opus as the oracle backbone; using a strong model with
full ground-truth access establishes an upper bound on scenario solvability that is unconfounded by model
capability. A scenario passes only when the oracle achievesbotha near-perfect entity-diff match (Entity F1
≥0.9) and a passing Agent Judge verdict; failures are routed for correction or removal.
Human expert review.Because the oracle check cannot detect scenarios that are technically solvable
yet semantically misaligned with the user’s intent, every scenario passing the oracle is further inspected
by human expert reviewers. Verification was performed by three expert annotators who partitioned the
post-downsampling pool, reviewing100scenarios each. For each scenario, the annotator inspected the task
specification, the attached images, the oracle-agent trajectory, the judge verdict, and the resulting state
changes, then (i) confirmed that oracle-passing scenarios were true positives rather than accidental passes, and
(ii) diagnosed oracle-failing scenarios as either problematic specifications or minor mismatches. The reviewers
verify that the dialogue, expected tools, entity specifications, and challenge type are mutually consistent,
10

Table 2Main results. Unless otherwise specified, all models are evaluated with thinking mode enabled using the
Code-Execution interface.
Model Agent Success Rate↑Entity F1↑A vg. Steps↓
Qwen 3.5-4B (Qwen, 2026) 0.116 0.641 54.5
Qwen 3.5-9B (Qwen, 2026) 0.190 0.693 53.8
Qwen 3.5-27B (Qwen, 2026) 0.349 0.792 46.9
Qwen 3.5-35B-A3B (Qwen, 2026) 0.260 0.751 48.0
Qwen 3.5-397B-A17B (Qwen, 2026) 0.353 0.793 50.4
GLM 4.6V (Hong et al., 2025) 0.190 0.709 46.6
KIMI 2.6 (KIMI, 2026) 0.415 0.817 48.1
GPT-5.4 (no thinking) (OpenAI, 2026) 0.291 0.794 27.8
GPT-5.4 (thinking-medium) (OpenAI, 2026) 0.361 0.81127.6
GPT-5.4 (thinking-high) (OpenAI, 2026) 0.4150.86536.1
Gemini 3.0 Flash (Google, 2025b) 0.364 0.619 34.9
Gemini 3.1 Pro (Google, 2026) 0.481 0.847 42.6
Claude 4.5 Sonnet (Anthropic, 2025a) 0.337 0.817 50.8
Claude 4.5 Opus (Anthropic, 2025b)0.4880.848 40.8
Upfront Mixed Late
Progressive
Image arrival
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0Agent SR
Claude 4.5 Opus
GPT-5.4 (thinking-high)
KIMI 2.6
Qwen 3.5-397B-A17B
(a)
3 4 5 6
Number of images
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7Agent SR
(b)
Standard
Goal Change
Error CorrectionState Mutation
Challenge type
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6Agent SR (c)
Lookup chain
CompareCompute
Cross-reference
ValidateAggregate
Filter
Information flow
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8Agent SR
0.739
0.684
0.615
0.491
0.440 0.437
0.370 (d)
Figure 5Scenario analysis. (a) Image arrival study. (b) Number of images within a scenario. (c) Challenge type. (d)
Information-flow study on the Claude 4.5 Opus model.
and that visual references resolve unambiguously to the attached images. Scenarios with a localized issue
were corrected in place, most commonly by adding a missing staging entity, and re-run through the oracle to
confirm solvability; scenarios that were unsolvable or infeasible to fix were discarded. Of the300scenarios
entering this stage, approximately50were corrected in place and42were removed, yielding the final258.
6 Experiments
We evaluated12strong multimodal foundation models on our MM-ToolSandBox benchmark, spanning
proprietary models (GPT-5.4 (OpenAI, 2026), Gemini-3.1 (Google, 2025b, 2026), Claude 4.5 (Anthropic,
2025b,a)) and open-weight models across a wide parameter range (Qwen 3.54B -397B parameters (Qwen,
2026), GLM 4.6V with106B parameters (Hong et al., 2025), and KIMI 2.6 with over1T parameters (KIMI,
2026)). Unless mentioned otherwise, all models are evaluated using the Code-Execution interface, with the full
511toolset and a maximum of100steps (incl. agent and user roles). The metrics are defined in Section 4.3,
including the Agent Success Rates (SR), Entity F1 for entity verification, and Average Steps.
6.1 Main Results
The main experimental results are presented in Table 2. We highlight four observations:1. Visual tool
calling remains challenging for frontier models.Even the strongest model, Claude 4.5 Opus, achieves
only48 .8%Agent Success Rate, while GPT-5.4 (thinking-high), which obtains the highest Entity F1, still
11

reaches only0.865. These results indicate that multi-step visual tool calling remains difficult, requiring
image-grounded reasoning, state updates, and interaction with dynamic user behavior.2. Agent SR, Entity
F1, and Avg. Steps capture different aspects of performance.Claude 4.5 Opus outperforms GPT-5.4
(thinking-medium) by over12%Agent SR, but reaches similar Entity F1 scores with only3%difference,
reflecting the difference between process-level task completion and final-state consistency. Avg. Steps provides
a further complementary signal: more steps do not necessarily lead to higher success rates, as shown by the
Qwen 3.5 model series.3. Reasoning improves task completion significantly.GPT-5.4 shows a clear
gain when native thinking is enabled: Agent Success Rate improves from29.1%without thinking to36 .1%
with medium thinking and41.5%with high thinking. Entity F1 also increases from0.794to0 .865, suggesting
that additional reasoning budget is important for visual tool calling.4. Scaling model size improves
task completion significantly.The Qwen 3.5 family provides a controlled comparison across model scales.
Performance improves substantially from4B to27B, with more than a23percentage-point gain in Agent SR
(from0.116to0.349).
6.2 Scenario Distribution Analysis
We further study how models behave under the visual complexity and information-flow patterns designed
in MM-ToolSandBox (Section 4). Figure 5a shows that scenarios where all images are provided upfront
in the conversation are substantially harder than those with progressive image delivery, with nearly a20%
success-rate gap. This is not surprising because for Upfront scenarios, later rounds often require referring
back to images sent in the beginning of the conversation, when dozens of tool-call exchanges have passed,
which stress tests models’ long-context visual referring capability. Late and Progressive patterns, on the
other hand, mostly deliver the image-relevant instructions at the same time the images arrive, making it
easier for the model to pinpoint the relevant visual cues. This result suggests thatmulti-image working
memory is a key bottleneck for current models.Figure 5b further examines model performance as
the number of images increases. The success rates of Qwen 3.5, Claude 4.5 Opus, and GPT-5.4 consistently
decrease with more images, highlighting the challenge of multi-image interaction. KIMI 2.6, in contrast,
remains relatively stable, suggesting stronger robustness to increasing visual context. Figure 5c compares
performance among different challenge types. Interestingly, the goal change category yields the highest SR,
because completion criteria only capture what needs to happen after the goal change, essentially reducing the
task length/complexity for the agent. State Mutation, on the other hand, presents a genuine challenge to the
agent, where it needs to find the necessary entities in the env before acting. Finally, Figure 5d reports Agent
SR for Claude 4.5 Opus across different information-flow types. Flow types requiring multi-image synthesis,
such as filtering and aggregation, are nearly twice as difficult as single-image retrieval patterns such as lookup
chains, again highlighting the need for improvement in models’ visual reasoning ability.
Image source analysis.We further break performance down by the visual character of the source
images, grouping the eight source datasets into four categories: Natural (text-rich), Natural (less text),
Docs/Charts/Tables, and UI. The full per-model table and grouping is shown in Appendix D.4. Documents,
charts, and tables are the easiest category across all six models evaluated (e.g.,0.554for Claude 4.5 Opus),
while UI screenshots are consistently the hardest (0.372for Opus, and only0.023for GLM 4.6V), which is
consistent with the dense, small-text nature of professional UI captures. Models also differ in which visual
regime suits them: Claude 4.5 Opus is substantially better on text-rich natural images than on natural
images with little text (0.48vs.0 .338), whereas that gap is much smaller for KIMI 2.6 and Claude 4.5 Sonnet,
indicating that visual bottlenecks are not uniform across models.
6.3 Agent Design Analysis
As motivated in Section 4.3, the harness built around a model increasingly shapes its end-task performance.
Having held this harness fixed for our main comparison, we now study the agent implementation design
directly.
User Simulation Study.As our benchmark focuses on multi-round user-agent interaction, the quality
of user simulation is highly important. To verify that user simulation quality does not confound our main
findings, we recompute Agent SR and Entity F1 after excluding all scenarios where the user simulator is
judged to have failed (See Appendix Table 7). Despite some variations, the overall ranking is fully preserved,
12

0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5
Agent SR
0.70
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90User SR
r = 0.81
p < 0.001
Code execution
T ool-use
(a)
GPT-5.4
Claude 4.5 SonnetQwen 3.5-397B
KIMI 2.6
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5Agent SR
Tool-use
Code execution (b)
Mini
(30)
Compact
(165)
Medium
(276)
Full
(511)
Toolset
0.15
0.20
0.25
0.30
0.35
0.40
0.45Agent SR
Qwen 3.5-397B-A17B
GPT-5.4 (no thinking) (c)
Figure 6(a). The correlation between Agent SR and User SR. (b). Comparing Tool-Use and Code-Execution interface
design. (c). Agent SR with different toolset interface design.
showing thatthe user simulation quality does not confound results.
We further plot User SR against Agent SR using18model rollouts in Figure 6a (including both code execution
and tool-use variants). The strong linear relationship (withr = 0.81) indicates that user simulation quality
is largely driven by agent behavior: agents that produce incoherent actions, fail to respond to queries, or
enter retry loops destabilize the user, leading to lower User SR. This confirms that performance differences in
Table 2 reflect genuine agent capability rather than user simulation artifacts.
Tool Discovery Analysis.Since agents must locate tools in a511-tool registry throughsearch_tool, we
ask whether discovery is itself a bottleneck. We measure surfaced recall (the fraction of tools on the scenario’s
reference solution path that the agent discovers) and invoked recall (the fraction it actually calls), reported in
Appendix D.3. Although search_tool currently uses simple keyword matching, it suffices as a baseline: the
three strongest models surface87–88%of expected tools and invoke81–83%. Critically, Claude 4.5 Sonnet and
Opus achieve nearly identical tool recall yet differ by∼15%in Agent SR, indicating that the tool discovery
is not the limiting factor for strong models. GLM 4.6V shows a clearer discovery deficit (70.4surfaced),
suggesting improved tool retrieval would benefit weaker models most..
Execution Mode AblationsAs mentioned in Section 3, MM-ToolSandBox enables Tool-Use and Code-
Execution modes. Here we study how models behave across execution interfaces. The results are shown in
Figure 6b. Comparing Code-Execution vs. Tool-Use modes, we find model-dependent preferences: Claude 4.5
Sonnet and Qwen 3.5-397B strongly prefer Code-Execution mode (+7.7and+6 .6), GPT-5.4 is mode-agnostic
(+1.2), and KIMI 2.6 instead shows stronger results in Tool-Use mode compared to Code-Execution. There
is no conclusive evidence showing one interface is better than the other. The result is model dependent.
Toolbox Granularity AblationWe ablate the toolbox interface, varying from the full511-tool registry
down to30mega-tools while keeping the underlying functionality identical, all levels dispatch to the same
backend APIs and produce the same state changes. The results are shown in Figure 6c. Agent SR across
toolbox levels oscillate within a small range and no clear pattern emerges. In terms of efficiency, Qwen
exhibits a U-shaped step curve: Compact (165 tools) is most efficient at 45.5 steps, Full and Medium are
intermediate at 50.4 and 50.3 respectively, and Mini is slowest at 61.4. GPT-5.4 shows the opposite: steps
decrease monotonically from Full (27.8), Medium (26.7), Compact (26.5) to Mini (23.3). This divergence
likely reflects architectural differences in how models handle tool schema complexity versus search cost.
6.4 Failure Analysis
Beyond aggregate metrics, we perform a detailed failure analysis on the strong models to understand why agents
fail and where capability improvements are most needed. Our LLM rubric judge evaluates five independent
criteria per scenario, namely, task completion, instruction following, tool-use validity, no side-effects, and
information accuracy. A scenario passes only if all five criteria pass. By examining which criteria fail and
13

Table 3Failure root-cause taxonomy. Percentages are relative to each model’s total failures.
Model F actual Error T ask F ailure Incomplete Exec. Uncontrolled Behav.
Claude 4.5 Opus (Anthropic, 2025b) (132) 70 (53.0%) 31 (23.5%) 19 (14.4%) 12 (9.1%)
GPT-5.4 (thinking) (OpenAI, 2026) (151) 76 (50.3%) 35 (23.2%) 20 (13.2%) 20 (13.2%)
KIMI 2.6 (KIMI, 2026) (151) 74 (49.0%) 51 (33.8%) 14 (9.3%) 12 (7.9%)
Qwen 3.5-397B-A17B (Qwen, 2026) (167) 85 (50.9%) 53 (31.7%) 12 (7.2%) 17 (10.2%)
Qwen 4B Qwen 9B Qwen 27B Qwen 397B Opus
0
20
40
60
80
100% of failures
12% 19% 35% 35% 49%SR:
Factual error
T ask failure
Incomplete execution
Uncontrolled behavior
Figure 7Failure root-cause distribution across model scale. As models grow, task failures (planning) give way to factual
errors (visual precision) as the dominant failure mode.
how they co-occur, we construct a root-cause taxonomy of failures.Factual error: task completion passes
but information accuracy fails. The agent did the right workflow but extracted wrong information from
images (e.g. misidentified an object, read wrong value from image),Task failure: the agent couldn’t complete
the primary action at all - missing entire workflow steps, can’t find resources, or enters unrecoverable loops,
which is a planning/execution failure.Incomplete execution: Both task completion and information accuracy
pass, but instruction following fails. The agent completed the task with correct facts but missed specific
requirements, e.g. omitted one of N items.Uncontrolled behavior: Only no side effects fails. The agent
performed unintended actions beyond the task scope, e.g. creating extra entities, leaving residual state from
earlier attempts etc.
Table 3 reveals that half of failures for all models stem from factual errors, cases where the agent successfully
completes the task workflow and uses tools correctly, but extracts incorrect information from the visual input.
For example, sub-categorizing these 70 Claude Opus failures, we find object misidentification dominates (29
cases), followed by fine-grained text extraction errors (16 cases). In rubric terms these are not planning
failures: task completion and tool-use validity pass while information accuracy fails, i.e., the agent knows what
to do but cannot precisely perceive what it sees. We read this as evidence thatvisual precision, rather
than tool-use competence, is the dominant failure mode for capable models.
Figure 7 tracks the failure taxonomy in the Qwen-3.5 models scaling curve and Claude 4.5 Opus. We observe
a cross-over between visual perception and planning errors: at 4B, task failures dominate (51% of failures),
reflecting an inability to plan and execute multi-step workflows. By 27B, task failures drop to 30% and
factual errors become the dominant mode (51%). This crossover continues to Opus, where factual errors
account for 53% of failures and task failures only 23%. The result suggests that for small models (below∼27B
parameters), the dominant failure mode is agentic planning: models cannot figure out what to do. At and
above this scale, planning failures become markedly less frequent and the dominant mode shifts to visual
precision: models cannot accurately perceive what they see. This suggests fundamentally different research
directions for improving small vs. large models on visual tool-calling tasks, i.e.model scaling reveals a
planning-to-precision failure pattern crossover.
We further show an example factual error case by Claude 4.5 Opus agent in Figure 10 and several failure
error cases in the Appendix.
14

Table 4UI mode results (50-scenario subset, Tool-Use mode). All models exhibit dramatic performance drops compared
to text-based interaction on the same underlying tasks.
Model Agent SR UI SR User SR Entity F1 A vg. Steps
Claude 4.5 Opus (Anthropic, 2025b) 0.200 0.280 0.680 0.609 74.5
GPT-5.4 (thinking) (OpenAI, 2026) 0.020 0.360 0.340 0.279 92.5
KIMI 2.6 (KIMI, 2026) 0.260 0.420 0.514 0.699 81.7
Qwen 3.5-397B-A17B (Qwen, 2026) 0.100 0.200 0.460 0.619 75.8
6.5 UI Mode
As a preliminary exploration, we evaluate four models on a 50-scenario UI subset, where agents must render
interactive visual interfaces for user decision-making rather than communicating through text in Table 4. Even
the best model (KIMI 2.6) achieves only 26.0% Agent SR, a sharp drop from its 45.0% on the same underlying
tasks in text-based Tool-Use mode. The primary bottleneck is UI rendering itself: models frequently fail
to produce functional interfaces with correct affordances, triggering retry loops that inflate average steps
to75-93. These results indicate that designing and rendering interactive interfaces on-the-fly represents
a substantially harder challenge than text-based tool calling, pointing to a promising direction for future
benchmark expansion. In other words,UI mode reveals a new capability frontier.
7 Conclusion
We introduced MM-ToolSandBox, a unified framework and benchmark for evaluating visually grounded
tool-calling agents. The framework provides a stateful, multi-turn, multi-image simulation environment
spanning511tools across16application domains, with both code-execution and structured tool-use interfaces.
The accompanying benchmark contributes258human-verified scenarios, together with50interactive UI
variants, produced by a scalable, information-flow-guided generation pipeline that reduces the annotation
burden to targeted human review. Evaluating12frontier and open-weight models, we find that visual tool
calling is far from solved: even the strongest model completes fewer than half of the tasks.
Our analysis surfaces several observations that we hope will guide future work. First, visual precision, rather
than tool-use competence, is the dominant failure mode for capable models: over half of the failures of the
strongest models stem from misreading visual inputs despite otherwise correct task workflows. Furthermore,
failure modes shift with scale, as smaller models fail primarily at planning (deciding what to do) whereas
larger models fail at perception (accurately grounding what they see), implying different research directions
at different capability levels. Multi-image working memory is a further key limitation, with performance
degrading as more images accumulate and especially when images must be recalled from early in a long
conversation. While both reasoning budget and model scale improve task completion, neither closes the
visual-precision gap. Finally, the agent harness matters and its effect is model-dependent, as no single
execution interface or toolbox granularity is uniformly best, underscoring the value of comparing models under
a common, well-specified harness; and interactive UI generation emerges as a substantially harder frontier,
with sharp performance drops relative to text-based tool use.
8 Limitations
Our work has several limitations. First, our primary metric relies on an LLM judge (Claude 4.5 Sonnet),
which achieves86%agreement (κ = 0.709) with the majority label of three independent expert annotators.
While this represents substantial agreement with a conservative bias, the judge may systematically miss
certain failure modes. We also use Claude 4.5 Opus as the oracle solvability filter, which might inflate the
performance of Claude-family models. Second, our claim that visual precision dominates strong-model failures
rests on decomposing rubric judgments rather than on a controlled manipulation. Future study should
have a cleaner decomposition of scenarios with and without visual inputs. On the data selection during
benchmark construction, even though we draw source images exclusively from the test splits of existing public
15

datasets, and each scenario recombines several images with newly generated user goals, tool-use workflows,
and environment states. Nevertheless, image-level contamination might still exist, and future versions of
our benchmark should incorporate newly captured, previously unpublished images. Finally, to keep model
comparisons fair, we evaluate every model under a single fixed harness (Section 4.3) rather than tuning the
scaffolding per model. Since agent performance is sensitive to the harness, our reported numbers reflect model
capability under this specific, standardized setup rather than each model’s best achievable performance under
a bespoke, model-specific harness. Systematically exploring the agent harness design space is a promising
direction for future work.
9 Acknowledgment
We thank Andrew Szot for invaluable suggestions and discussions.
