record_id: s2_snowball:99563c273b95c0a06125ccea8e74f4c50984d48a
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2608.18933
fetched_title: SkillForge: Self-Distilling Agents for Project-Specific Issue Resolution
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:58Z

SkillForge: Self-Distilling Agents for
Project-Specific Issue Resolution
Silin Chen∗, Han Li∗, Xiaodong Gu†, Yuling Shi, Haibing Guan
Shanghai Jiao Tong University
cslsolow@gmail.com, lihan0421@sjtu.edu.cn, xiaodong.gu@sjtu.edu.cn
yuling.shi@sjtu.edu.cn, hbguan@sjtu.edu.cn
Abstract—Large language model (LLM) based agents have
demonstrated remarkable proficiency in automated software is-
sue resolution, yet they often struggle to resolve issues in a specific
repository because they lack project-specific knowledge. Existing
self-evolving approaches acquire such knowledge from repository
history or online repair trajectories, but they either depend on
available historical issue-resolution signals or incur substantial
per-issue test-time exploration cost. In this paper, we propose
SkillForge, a self-distillation framework that proactively acquires
project-specific knowledge from the repository itself. Instead of
waiting for real issues to expose project-specific knowledge gaps,
SkillForge synthesizes project-specific issues by re-implementing
test-covered core functionalities of the repository. By resolving
these synthetic issues, SkillForge distills reusable project-specific
knowledge into entity-grounded skills and associates them with
relevant repository entities for future issue resolution. Extensive
experiments using both open-source and closed-source models
show that SkillForge consistently improves issue resolution per-
formance over strong baselines. These results demonstrate that
proactively acquiring project-specific knowledge before solving
real issues substantially improves downstream software issue
resolution1.
Index Terms—Software engineering agents, software issue
resolution, large language models
I. INTRODUCTION
Large language model (LLM) based agents have demon-
strated remarkable capabilities in software issue resolu-
tion [1]–[15]. By autonomously navigating repositories, in-
voking tools, and iteratively proposing patches, modern soft-
ware engineering (SWE) agents—such as SWE-agent [16]
and OpenHands [17]—can resolve complex, real-world bugs
that previously required expert human intervention. Driven
by increasingly powerful foundation models and better scaf-
folding designs, these agents have achieved impressive results
on standard benchmarks such as SWE-bench [3], [18]–[23],
demonstrating strong generalization across diverse codebases
and issue types.
Despite these advances, a critical bottleneck emerges when
agents are deployed on a specific project: they typically must
solve issues from scratch, without project-specific knowledge.
Real-world projects often exhibit structural regularities: recur-
ring failures may involve the same brittle modules, correct
∗Silin Chen and Han Li contributed equally to this work.†Corresponding author: Xiaodong Gu.
1Our code and data are available at https://github.com/cslsolow/SkillForge
patches may need to preserve repository-specific API con-
tracts, and related APIs are often coupled through implicit
execution paths. Agents that lack such project-specific knowl-
edge must repeatedly rediscover these conventions during issue
resolution. This limitation creates a cold-start problem: before
project-specific knowledge has been acquired, even a highly
capable agent is reduced to a generic repository explorer and
can repeatedly fall into the same project-specific pitfalls.
To address this knowledge gap, recent works have ex-
plored self-evolving SWE agents that acquire project-specific
knowledge from prior issue-resolution signals [2], [24]–[29].
History-driven methods such as EvoCoder [24] and SWE-
Exp [2] distill reusable knowledge from historical issues, com-
mits, or agent trajectories. Online methods instead refine the
agent during test-time exploration by generating additional tra-
jectories on the current issue. While effective, both paradigms
acquire project-specific knowledge reactively. History-driven
methods are bounded by the richness and coverage of past
issues: repository behaviors, API combinations, and long-tail
components that have not been exercised by historical trajec-
tories provide little learning signal. Online methods reduce
this dependence on history, but they pay substantial trajectory,
token, and time costs for each target issue [30], and the
acquired guidance becomes available only after the issue has
already arrived.
In this paper, we propose SkillForge, a proactive self-
distillation framework for addressing the cold-start problem in
project-specific issue resolution. Rather than waiting for real
issue-resolution history to accumulate, SkillForge synthesizes
project-specific issues from the current repository. Given a
repository snapshot, SkillForge starts from test-covered core
functionalities, follows execution traces to identify the code
regions that jointly implement the same functionality, and
rewrites these coordinated segments under constrained context.
The resulting synthetic issues are executable and behaviorally
grounded by the repository tests. A SWE agent then resolves
these synthetic issues, producing trajectories from which Skill-
Forge distills project-specific knowledge.
SkillForge organizes the distilled knowledge as a dual-level
skill repository. The global diagnostic skill set (Mext) captures
reusable project-level knowledge for diagnosis and navigation,
including entity roles, reasoning playbooks, and related APIs.
The local intervention skill set (M int) records entity-specific
arXiv:2608.18933v1 [cs.SE] 19 Aug 2026

Issue Resolution Attempt
Inject Mintwhen accessing APIs
Just-in-time guidance
SkillAdaptationSkillDistillationProject-Specific Issue
Retrieve Mextbefore solving
Fast, accurate debuggingRealistic buggy instances
(problem + fail-to-pass test)
Two complementary
Micro JIT Injection
(search/edit/test/patch)
Macro Initialization
Agent attempts fix
Distill trajectories
into skills
Repository code
+ tests
Coverage-guided
code rewriting
Full trajectories
Synthesis
Skill sets
New issue
Phase 4Phase 2 Phase 3Phase 1
· Localized guidance
Localized/Specific
·Playbook heuristics
(global priors)
environment
· Failure reflections
Global/Structural
· Module purpose
Trajectories
Synthesized Intervention Skill Set
collected
Skills
· Related APIs
Isolated
Resolution
Success
· Fix lessons
Instances
Global
Attempts
Local
Failure
Mext
Buggy
Mint
Issues
Speed AccuracyTrail-and-error
DiagnosticSkill Set
Fig. 1: Overview of SkillForge.
modification guidance and pitfall-avoidance lessons distilled
from successful and failed resolution trajectories. During
downstream issue resolution, SkillForge first retrieves relevant
global diagnostic skills as initial project-specific context, and
then injects local intervention skills just in time whenever the
agent accesses corresponding repository entities. This design
treats skills as one concrete representation of project-specific
knowledge, while keeping retrieval aligned with the agent’s
current code interaction context.
We implement SkillForge with Mini-SWE-Agent and eval-
uate it on SWE-bench Verified [31] and SWE-bench Pro [32]
using both DeepSeek-V3.2 and GPT-5-mini. On SWE-bench
Verified, SkillForge achieves 72.2% and 60.6% Pass@1, im-
proving over Mini-SWE-Agent by +5.8 and +5.6 percentage
points, respectively. On SWE-bench Pro, SkillForge further
improves over Mini-SWE-Agent by +5.8 and +4.1 percentage
points. Across both benchmarks, SkillForge outperforms all
evaluated history-driven and online project-specific knowledge
acquisition baselines available for each benchmark, showing
that proactive project-specific knowledge acquisition can im-
prove issue resolution without relying on rich historical issue
trajectories or heavy per-issue online exploration.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:
•We propose a novel self-distillation paradigm for ad-
dressing the cold-start problem in project-specific is-
sue resolution. SkillForge proactively acquires project-
specific knowledge from a repository’s own tests and
code, without relying on rich historical issue-resolution
trajectories or costly per-issue online exploration.
•We design a dual-level skill repository that represents
project-specific knowledge as global diagnostic skills
and local intervention skills, enabling entity-grounded
retrieval and just-in-time guidance during downstream
issue resolution.
•Empirically, SkillForge improves over Mini-SWE-
Agent by +5.8%/+5.6% on SWE-bench Verified and
+5.8%/+4.1% on SWE-bench Pro for DeepSeek-V3.2
and GPT-5-mini, respectively, outperforming all evalu-
ated history-driven and online project-specific knowledge
acquisition baselines available for each benchmark.
II. METHODOLOGY
SkillForge is a self-distillation framework for addressing
the cold-start problem in project-specific issue resolution. The
key idea is to proactively derive project-specific knowledge
directly from the repository itself, rather than waiting for real-
world issue-resolution trajectories to accumulate. To achieve
this, SkillForge synthesize project-specific issues, resolves
them with a SWE agent, and distills the resulting project-
specific knowledge into reusable skills that can be retrieved
during subsequent real-world issue resolution.
Figure 1 presents an overview of SkillForge. Given a
repository snapshot and its test suite, the framework consists of
four stages: (1) generating project-specific synthetic issues by
rewriting core functionalities; (2) resolving these issues with a
SWE agent through iterative patch generation, tool execution,
and test feedback; (3) distilling project-specific knowledge
from the resulting resolution trajectories and organizing it
as reusable skills in a dual-level skill repository, comprising
a global diagnostic skill set that captures reusable project-
level knowledge and a local intervention skill set that records
entity-specific guidance; and (4) retrieving the relevant skills
during downstream real-world issue resolution whenever the
corresponding repository entities are encountered. Each stage
is described in detail below.

A. Project-Specific Issue Synthesis
To acquire project-specific knowledge without relying on
historical issue reports, SkillForge synthesizes project-specific
issues by rewriting functionality-critical code segments and
treating the resulting test failures as resolution targets. Rather
than explicitly injecting handcrafted bugs, the framework asks
an LLM to reimplement repository functionality under con-
strained context, encouraging the rewritten code to naturally
exhibit implementation mistakes similar to those introduced
during real software development. More importantly, because
the model must reconstruct functionality without access to the
original implementation, the rewritten code reflects its general
coding knowledge rather than the repository’s project-specific
knowledge, thereby exposing the project-specific behaviors
that the agent needs to learn. Throughout this process, su-
pervision is derived solely from the repository’s codebase and
test suite, without relying on historical issue reports or human-
written bug descriptions.
Test-driven scope and trace.Given a code repositoryR,
SkillForge identifies test cases that exercise core repository
functionalities, since these behaviors provide the most in-
formative supervision for project-specific knowledge acquisi-
tion [33], [34]. For each passed test case, SkillForge executes
it under coverage instrumentation to obtain an execution trace:
the set of source files and line ranges that are exercised. This
trace defines the candidate code regions for rewriting since
modifications within executed regions are more likely to affect
observable test outcomes. We then extract contiguous code
segments from the traced regions—either complete functions
or cohesive execution fragments, and attach surrounding con-
text (e.g., preceding and following lines) for each segment.
Select critical segments.The number of traced segments
can be large. We use an LLM to select a small set ofcritical
segments that are most likely to represent the functionality
of this test case. The LLM is given the test’s purpose and
scenario (derived from the test code or description) along with
summaries of the candidate segments (file, line range, and code
content). It returns a ranked subset of top-ksegments with
brief justifications. This step keeps the subsequent rewriting
phase focused on high-impact regions. Unlike function-level
rewriting approaches, SkillForge may select multiple critical
segments exercised by the same test case, enabling synthetic
issues that capture cross-component interactions within the
repository.
Code rewriting.For each selected segment, we ask an
LLM torewritethe corresponding code by re-completing
the local functionality. Crucially, the LLM is not provided
with the original implementation; instead, it receives only
limited contextual information: the lines before and after the
segment, the segment’s location and indentation, and a high-
level description of the test’s goal. The model is prompted to
produce a plausible alternative implementation that preserves
the intended API while potentially simplifying logic. Rather
than explicitly injecting predefined faults, this “strict-mask”
design exposes the gap between an agent’s general coding
Te st-driven Scope & Trace
Repository
PASS test
Coverage
Monitoring
Excution
Trace
Select Critical Segments
Filter and Rank Top-K Critical
Segments
Code Segments
LLM
Code Rewriting
LLM
Context
（before）
[MASKED]
Context
（after）
Buggy code
Variant
Buggy code
Variant
Buggy code
Variant
Instance Assembly & Problem statement
PASS test
Buggy Code
FAIL test
Apply
LLM
Base commit Buggy Patch
Issue
Description
Pass_To_Fail
Test ID
Instance
Fig. 2: Synthesize project-specific issues.
knowledge and the repository’s project-specific knowledge by
inducing realistic implementation mistakes under constrained
context.
Instance assembly and problem statement.Once the
rewritten segments induce test failures, we construct a buggy
repository snapshot and derive both a buggy patch and a refer-
ence patch. Following prior synthetic SWE task construction
works [35]–[37], we execute the failing tests and use an LLM
to convert the resulting failure evidence into a user-facing
problem statement without exposing implementation details
or repair hints. The resulting synthetic instance consists of
a base commit, a buggy patch, a reference patch, a problem
statement, and the associated test cases, matching the standard
SWE-bench issue-resolution format. These synthetic instances
serve as self-supervised tasks for acquiring project-specific
knowledge before real issue resolution.
Issue Resolution AttemptFor each synthesized instance,
SkillForge follows the SWE-bench-style issue resolution pro-
tocol: the agent is placed in an isolated repository environment,
receives the problem statement and buggy codebase, and
attempts to produce a patch that resolves the failing tests.
We record the resulting action trajectory (e.g., file edits, shell
commands, and test runs) for subsequent skill distillation.
B. Skill Distillation
The objective of this stage is to distill project-specific
knowledge from synthetic issue-resolution trajectories and
organize it as reusable skills. Formally, given a trajectory
T={(a 1,o 1),...,(a n,o n)}wherea i ando i denote the
agent’s action and the environment’s observation at stepi, our

Trajector y𝑇 = 𝑎!,𝑜!,…,𝑎",𝑜"
Parse shell
commands
grep sed cat
Extract file
coordinates
& line ranges
Align with
repository
AST index
𝐸!"#$⊆𝑅
Distilling External Knowledge(Mext) Distilling Internal Knowledge(Mint)
Trajectory Normalization and Scope Alignment
Mext：Global Diagnostic
Skills Set
Mint：Local Intervention
Skills Set
LLM synthesizes
Structured records
For each entity 𝛼∈𝐸!"#$
Structured Record format
Purpose
Playbook
Related_apis
Successful
Trajectories
Failed
Trajectories
Analyze resolved
Trajectory
Contrastive
analysis
Keypoints
Extraction Box
SkillRecord Format
api_path
Intervention_skills(array)
· Avoid overriding …
· Ensure setup_query...
· Call get_initial_aliaswhen...
Fig. 3: Skill distillation.
extraction pipeline transformsTinto two complementary skill
sets within the dual-level skill repository:M ext andM int.
Trajectory Normalization and Entity Alignment.Before
skill distillation, we normalize the trajectories and align them
with the repository’s entities. Given a target repositoryR, we
perform a structured analysis of the trajectoryTto identify
code-access events. By parsing shell commands (e.g.,grep,
sed,cat) in the trajectory, we extract a set of accessed files,
represented by coordinates and line ranges. We then align these
coordinates with the repository’s structural index—an AST-
derived mapping from source files to their class and function
hierarchies—to resolve them into cohesive code scopes (e.g.,
frequently accessed files or core modules). Beyond trajectory-
derived accesses, files surfaced in the agent’s submission
diff, the golden patch, and the test patch are additionally
incorporated to ensure coverage of ground-truth edit sites. The
resulting collection is denoted as a set of candidate entities
Ecand ⊆ R. This step ensures that the extracted skills are
strictly grounded in the actual codebase structure, preventing
the LLM from hallucinating non-existent interfaces during
subsequent extraction.
Distilling Global Diagnostic Skills (M ext).M ext rep-
resents project-specific diagnostic knowledge as global di-
agnostic skills distilled from synthetic issue-resolution tra-
jectories. Unlike repository summaries that describe what a
module contains,M ext captures how an agent should reason
about a repository entity during issue resolution, including
where to begin debugging, which APIs are jointly involved,
and what repository-specific behaviors should be considered.
These skills are organized as structured skill records and
associated with the corresponding repository entities for future
retrieval. For each candidate entityα∈ E cand, an LLM
analyzes the corresponding resolution trajectories together
with the repository context to distill three complementary
aspects of project-specific knowledge: (i) the entity’s func-
tional role in issue resolution, (ii) reusable reasoning strategies
repeatedly validated during issue resolution , and (iii) project-
specific API interactions that emerge during problem solving.
These are represented as thepurpose,playbook, and
related_apisfields, respectively. For example,
{
"api_path": "django/db/models/sql/compiler.py",
"purpose": "Compiles Django ORM queries into SQL
statements, ...",
"playbook": "If the issue involves SQL ..., first
check if setup_query properly ...",
"related_apis": [
{"api_path": "django/db/models/sql/query.py",
"reason": "Provides the Query class that
manages alias ..."},
...]
}
The design of each key is specifically tailored to enhance the
agent’s autonomous capabilities: (1) Thepurposefield iden-
tifies the role an entity plays during issue resolution, helping
the agent determine whether it is a relevant debugging entry
point rather than merely summarizing its implementation.
(2) Theplaybookfield captures project-specific reasoning
patterns distilled from trajectories. Rather than generic de-
bugging advice, it records repository-specific knowledge that
has been validated through interaction with the repository. (3)
Therelated_apisfield records APIs that are repeatedly
co-involved during issue resolution. Unlike static dependency
graphs, these relationships reflect repository-specific interac-
tion patterns observed during problem solving, allowing the
agent to navigate cross-module behaviors that are not evident
from structural dependencies alone.
Unlike repository summarization, which captures static code
semantics, our objective is to distill actionable project-specific
knowledge that emerges only when an agent attempts to solve
project-specific issues.
Distilling Local Intervention Skills (M int).In con-
trast,M int stores project-specific intervention knowledge that
guides how a repository entity should be modified during issue
resolution. UnlikeM ext, which supports repository navigation
and diagnosis,M int captures concrete repair knowledge dis-
tilled from issue-resolution trajectories. This knowledge is rep-
resented as local intervention skills associated with individual
repository entities. We distill this intervention knowledge from
both successful and failed resolution trajectories. Success-
ful trajectories reveal repair strategies that consistently lead
to correct implementations, while failed trajectories expose
repository-specific pitfalls by contrasting incorrect patches
with the corresponding reference patches. The resulting knowl-
edge is transformed into actionable intervention skills and
indexed by repository entities. Combining successful and

failed trajectories provides complementary supervision: the
former reinforces effective repair patterns, whereas the latter
helps the agent avoid recurring mistakes when modifying the
same repository entities in future issue-resolution tasks. For
example,
{
"api_path": "django/db/models/sql/compiler.py",
"intervention_skills": [
"Avoid overriding ... because ...",
...]
}
Conceptually,M ext captures diagnostic skills for understand-
ing repository entities and planning repository navigation,
whereasM int captures intervention skills for modifying those
entities based on project-specific knowledge distilled from
synthetic issue resolution.
C. Skill Adaptation
To utilize the acquired project-specific knowledge during
downstream issue resolution, SkillForge retrieves the distilled
skills associated with relevant repository entities and injects
them into the agent’s reasoning process. This retrieval follows
a two-stage, context-aware mechanism consisting of macro-
level initialization and micro-level just-in-time (JIT) interven-
tion.
Macro-level Initialization with Global Diagnostic Skills.
Before the agent begins resolving a new issue, we first estab-
lish a global semantic context using the diagnostic knowledge
represented by the global skill set (Mext). Given the new issue
description as a query, we employ a BM25 retriever to identify
the top-kmost relevant skill records fromM ext. The selected
records—comprising the API paths, their purposes, and the
associated playbooks—are prepended to the agent’s initial
prompt as project-specific priors. This equips the agent with
an immediate, high-level understanding of the repository’s
architecture and relevant previously distilled heuristics.
Micro-level JIT Injection of Local Intervention Skills.
While the macro-level injection provides initial guidance,
flooding the context with all local intervention skills (M int)
at once would introduce significant noise. Instead, SkillForge
dynamically injectsM int based on the agent’s real-time
actions. At each interaction step, SkillForge monitors the
agent’s executed shell commands to extract the specific file
paths it is currently accessing. If an accessed file matches
an entry inM int, the corresponding intervention cues and
reflections are appended to the agent’s context as an auxiliary
observation for the subsequent reasoning step. This dynamic
mechanism ensures that the agent receives targeted, pitfall-
avoidance guidance exactly when it navigates to a relevant
codebase region, ensuring the injected skills are strictly aligned
with the agent’s current code interaction context.
Unlike existing methods that retrieve semantically simi-
lar records from a centralized knowledge store, SkillForge
grounds project-specific knowledge directly to repository en-
tities. Consequently, retrieval is triggered by the agent’s inter-
action with the corresponding code entities rather than solely
by semantic similarity. This entity-grounded design ensures
that diagnostic and intervention knowledge is delivered pre-
cisely when the agent reaches the relevant repository context,
reducing retrieval ambiguity while maintaining tight alignment
between the injected knowledge and the code under inspection.
III. EXPERIMENTALSETUP
A. Research Questions
We aim to evaluate SkillForge by answering four research
questions (RQs):
RQ1 (Effectiveness of SkillForge):What is the impact of
SkillForge on issue resolution performance compared to other
self-evolving methods?
RQ2 (Ablation Study):How do the different components
of SkillForge individually affect its effectiveness?
RQ3 (Impact of Hyperparameters):How do the key hy-
perparameters influence the overall performance of SkillForge?
RQ4 (Efficacy across Diverse Repositories):Does Skill-
Forge consistently demonstrate effectiveness across various
repositories?
B. Datasets
We evaluate SkillForge onSWE-bench Verified[31], a
human-validated benchmark released by OpenAI, which has
been widely adopted as the standard for evaluating software
engineering agents. The benchmark consists of 500 tasks
sourced from popular Python repositories on GitHub.
We additionally evaluate on the fullSWE-bench Pro[32],
consisting of 731 instances across Python, JavaScript, Type-
Script, and Go repositories. This benchmark contains more
challenging long-horizon software engineering tasks that better
reflect realistic multi-file issue resolution.
C. Baseline Methods
We compare SkillForge with representative approaches that
acquire project-specific knowledge from different supervision
sources.
History-driven project-specific knowledge acquisition.
These methods acquire project-specific knowledge from histor-
ical issue-resolution issues, and reuse the distilled knowledge
to assist future issue resolution.
•SWE-Exp[2]: A framework that distills diagnostic pat-
terns and repair strategies from prior agent trajectories,
utilizing a dual-agent architecture to provide actionable
guidance for new tasks.
•EvoCoder[24]: A multi-agent continual learning frame-
work that uses trajectory-based reflection to progressively
refine problem-solving strategies based on previously
resolved cases.
•MemGovern[25]: MemGovern converts human debug-
ging traces from GitHub into structured memory, enabling
code agents to leverage prior problem-solving knowledge
for improved issue resolution.
Online project-specific knowledge acquisition.These ap-
proaches adapt agents during the resolution of the current issue
by distilling project-specific knowledge from substantial online
reasoning trajectories through test-time exploration:

•SAGE[27]: A plan-learning method that distills reusable
problem-solving guidance from ongoing agent attempts to
iteratively improve performance on the current instance.
•SWE-Debate[28]: A multi-agent competitive framework
that evolves stronger fix strategies through structured
debate over competing reasoning trajectories.
•Live-SWE-agent[29]: A live self-evolving software
agent that autonomously updates its own scaffold during
runtime while solving software engineering tasks.
Variants of SkillForge.To isolate the source of project-
specific knowledge in SkillForge, we compare against two
controlled variants while keeping the same downstream reused
mechanism:
•SkillForge w/ SWE-Smith.A controlled synthesis vari-
ant that replaces our functionality-level repository prob-
ing with SWE-Smith single-function rewriting.
•SkillForge w/ LLM Summary.A static repository-
understanding variant that replaces trajectory-distilled
project-specific knowledge with LLM-generated reposi-
tory summaries.
D. Metrics
We evaluate SkillForge from both effectiveness and cost-
efficiency perspectives.
Pass@1denotes the percentage of issues successfully re-
solved on the first attempt, following the evaluation protocol
of [1], [16]. It directly measures the framework’s ability to
generate correct patches without relying on repeated repair
iterations.
Avg Costrepresents the average end-to-end monetary cost
per evaluated issue, measured in U.S. dollars [30]. The re-
ported cost amortizes offline pre-computation over the eval-
uated instances and includes all stages of the framework
pipeline, including synthetic issue generation, trajectory col-
lection, skill distillation, and online issue resolution. MemGov-
ern [25] constructs a pre-constructed∼150K-card experience
base from public GitHub issues using GPT-5.1; since the
associated preprocessing cost is unavailable, it is excluded
from Avg Cost.
E. Implementation Details
We implement SkillForge with Mini-SWE-Agent [38], a
bash-based agent scaffold [27], [39], [40], and evaluate
DeepSeek-V3.2 [41] and GPT-5-mini [42] with default infer-
ence settings.
For SWE-bench Verified, synthesis is temporally isolated.
For each target instance, we first roll back the repository before
both the golden patch and golden test patch; on this rolled-back
snapshot, an LLM localizes semantically relevant tests because
extracting the full test suite from every snapshot is time- and
compute-intensive. We synthesize issues only from this filtered
subset, yielding 577 synthesized issues. SkillForge itself does
not require historical issue-resolution data; in the temporal
evaluation protocol, the agent may retrieve only skills distilled
from synthesized issues in the same repository whose source
TABLE I: Main results on SWE-bench Verified.
Method Model Pass@1 Avg Cost
Mini-SWE-Agent DeepSeek-V3.2 66.4% $0.049
GPT-5-mini 55.0% $0.031
History-driven project-specific knowledge acquisition
SWE-Exp DeepSeek-V3.2 69.0% †↑2.6%$0.090
GPT-5-mini 56.6% †↑1.6%$0.065
EvoCoder DeepSeek-V3.2 67.0%↑0.6%$0.064
GPT-5-mini 58.4%↑3.4%$0.052
MemGovern DeepSeek-V3.2 69.2% †↑2.8%–
GPT-5-mini 58.0% †↑3.0%–
Online project-specific knowledge acquisition
SAGE DeepSeek-V3.2 67.2%↑0.8%$0.081
GPT-5-mini 56.0% †↑1.0%$0.052
SWE-Debate DeepSeek-V3.2 68.2%↑1.8%$0.382
GPT-5-mini 56.4%↑1.4%$0.167
Live-SWE-agent DeepSeek-V3.2 67.0%↑0.6%$0.050
GPT-5-mini 55.6%↑0.6%$0.042
Variants of SkillForge
SkillForge w/ SWE-Smith DeepSeek-V3.2 68.0%↑1.6%$0.088
GPT-5-mini 56.4% †↑1.4%$0.071
SkillForge w/ LLM Summary DeepSeek-V3.2 68.7% †↑2.3%$0.069
GPT-5-mini 54.4%↓0.6%$0.065
SkillForge DeepSeek-V3.272.2% †↑5.8%$0.074
GPT-5-mini60.6% †↑5.6%$0.066
†:p−value <0.05.
commits predate the target instance’s gold commit, ensuring
that no current-instance or future information is used.
For the two variants, we extract relevant functions from the
baseline agent’s trajectory, then apply either SWE-Smith-style
single-function rewriting or an LLM summary of how those
functions are jointly used; both keep SkillForge’s skill format
and injection interface. Across all stages, temperature is 0, the
action budget is 250 steps, BM25 retrieves top-5skills, and
Table I reports Pass@1 averaged over three runs.
IV. RESULTS
A. RQ1: Effectiveness of SkillForge
Table I summarizes the main results on SWE-bench Ver-
ified. SkillForge achieves 72.2% and 60.6% Pass@1 with
DeepSeek-V3.2 and GPT-5-mini, outperforming all base-
lines by absolute margins of+5.8%and+5.6%over Mini-
SWE-Agent. Among history-driven project-specific knowl-
edge acquisition methods, MemGovern is the strongest
competitor (69.2%/58.0%), yet SkillForge still surpasses
it by +3.0%/+2.6%. One possible reason is that history-
driven project-specific knowledge acquisition methods are
bounded by the coverage and quality of repository history:
knowledge distilled from prior repository histories only re-
flects previously observed issue types, often remains coarse
or instance-tied, and external debugging discussions im-
prove coverage only by weakening repository specificity.
Among online project-specific knowledge acquisition meth-
ods, SkillForge also surpasses SAGE (67.2%/56.0%) and
SWE-Debate (68.2%/56.4%), with gains of +5.0%/+4.6%
and +4.0%/+4.2%, respectively, while avoiding the high per-
issue exploration cost of methods such as SWE-Debate. For
DeepSeek-V3.2, it also outperforms Live-SWE-agent (67.0%,

TABLE II: Main results on SWE-bench Pro.
DeepSeek-V3.2 GPT-5-mini
Method Pass@1 Avg Cost Pass@1 Avg Cost
Mini-SWE-Agent 28.3% $0.047 47.6% $0.063
SWE-Exp 29.4%↑1.1%$0.083 48.7%↑0.9%$0.089
Live-SWE-agent 32.4%↑4.1%$0.051 49.1% †↑1.5%$0.072
SkillForge34.1% †↑5.8%$0.069 51.7% †↑4.1%$0.087
†:p−value <0.05.
$0.050) by +5.2%. Compared with Mini-SWE-Agent and
history-driven project-specific knowledge acquisition methods,
the main cost difference of SkillForge lies in the offline
pre-computation stage, where it synthesizes project-specific
issues and distills skills from their resolution trajectories.
Therefore, the reported Avg Cost includes amortized offline
pre-computation; once this repository-level skill repository is
built, the online cost of resolving each real issue remains close
to that of the underlying agent.
Table II further reports results on SWE-bench Pro. Skill-
Forge achieves 34.1% Pass@1 with DeepSeek-V3.2 and
51.7% with GPT-5-mini, improving over Mini-SWE-Agent
by +5.8% and +4.1%, respectively, with both gains statis-
tically significant (p-value<0.05). It also outperforms the
strongest available Pro baselines, exceeding Live-SWE-agent
by +1.7%/+2.6% and SWE-Exp by +4.7%/+3.2% under the
two backbones.
Among the controlled variants, SkillForge w/ SWE-Smith
reaches 68.0%/$0.088 and 56.4%/$0.071 under DeepSeek-
V3.2 and GPT-5-mini, respectively, while SkillForge w/ LLM
Summary reaches 68.7%/$0.069 and 54.4%/$0.065. These re-
sults show that skill injection alone is insufficient: both simply
summarizing trajectory-extracted functions and rewriting one
function at a time underperform the full method. SWE-Smith
rewrites one function at a time, whereas SkillForge starts from
a repository functionality exposed by a core test, follows its
execution trace, and rewrites multiple coordinated functions
or code segments that are naturally composed to realize that
functionality. This functionality-level synthesis captures inter-
function coordination, API coupling, and project-specific re-
pair pitfalls, while more naturally surfacing the current LLM’s
repository-misaligned coding tendencies.
Finding 1
SkillForge outperforms all evaluated history-driven and
online project-specific knowledge acquisition baselines
available for each benchmark, improving over Mini-SWE-
Agent by+5.8%/+5.6%on SWE-bench Verified and
+5.8%/+4.1%on SWE-bench Pro.
B. RQ2: Ablation Study
We investigate two questions: (1) whether both forms of
project-specific knowledge are necessary for issue resolution,
and (2) whether project-specific knowledge distilled for one
LLM backbone transfers to another.
a) Component ablation.:Table III reports the effect of
removing each type of project-specific knowledge. Removing
TABLE III: Ablation study results.
Approach DeepSeek-V3.2 GPT-5-mini
w/o Global Diagnostic Skills 68.4% (↓3.8%) 57.6% (↓3.0%)
w/o Local Intervention Skills 67.8% (↓4.4%) 57.2% (↓3.4%)
SkillForge 72.2% 60.6%
TABLE IV: Cross-LLM skill transfer on SWE-bench Verified.
Resolver LLM denotes the backbone used for real issue res-
olution, while Knowledge-source LLM denotes the backbone
used to synthesize instances and distill skills.
Resolver LLM Knowledge-source LLM Pass@1
GPT-5-mini GPT-5-mini60.6%
DeepSeek-V3.2 55.0%
DeepSeek-V3.2 GPT-5-mini 65.2%
DeepSeek-V3.272.2%
Mext leads to drops of 3.8% and 3.0%, demonstrating the
importance of repository-level diagnostic knowledge for issue
resolution. RemovingM int causes slightly larger drops of
4.4% and 3.4%, showing that project-specific intervention
knowledge distilled from synthetic issue-resolution trajectories
is equally critical. These results indicate that effective use
of project-specific knowledge requires both repository-level
diagnostic knowledge and entity-level intervention knowledge,
which provide complementary guidance throughout the issue-
resolution process.
b) Transferability of project-specific knowledge across
LLM backbones.:We further investigate whether the project-
specific knowledge distilled by SkillForge is transferable
across LLM backbones. Specifically, we use one LLM to
synthesize project-specific issues, resolve them, and distill
the resulting project-specific knowledge, which is represented
as reusable skills. These skills are then injected during is-
sue resolution performed by either the same or a different
LLM. Table IV exhibits a clear diagonal pattern: each re-
solver LLM achieves the best performance when paired with
project-specific knowledge distilled from itself. DeepSeek-
V3.2 reaches 72.2% when using its own distilled skills but
drops to 65.2% when using GPT-5-mini’s. Similarly, GPT-5-
mini achieves 60.6% with its own distilled skills but decreases
to 55.0% when using those distilled by DeepSeek-V3.2. These
results indicate that the distilled project-specific knowledge is
not universally transferable across LLMs. Instead, it captures
how a particular LLM reasons about and edits a specific repos-
itory. Since different LLMs exhibit different coding priors, the
repository-specific mismatches exposed during synthetic issue
resolution are likewise model dependent, leading to differ-
ent project-specific knowledge being distilled. Consequently,
knowledge distilled from one LLM provides limited guidance
for another and may even introduce irrelevant context.

0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 full
Retrieval Count (k)
62.0
64.0
66.0
68.0
70.0Pass@1 (%)
(a)
0 1 3 5 7
Code Segment T op-k
(b)
Fig. 4: Hyperparameter study results on the Sphinx and Django
repositories with GPT-5-mini. (a) BM25 skill retrieval count.
(b) Code segment rewritten count during issue synthesis. Red
stars mark the best-performingkin each setting.
Finding 2
Effective issue resolution requires both repository-level
diagnostic knowledge and entity-level intervention knowl-
edge. Moreover, the distilled project-specific knowledge is
LLM-specific rather than universally transferable across
backbones.
C. RQ3: Impact of Hyperparameters
We investigate the sensitivity of SkillForge to two key
hyperparameters governing project-specific knowledge acqui-
sition and utilization: (1) the number of retrieved global
diagnostic skill records per issue (k r), and (2) the number of
code segments rewritten to synthesize project-specific issues
(ks).
To evaluatek r, we conducted a hyperparameter study on the
Django and Sphinx repositories using GPT-5-mini, varyingk r
from 0 to 7, as well as a “full” condition where all relevant
skill records were retrieved. Figure 4(a) reports Pass@1 as a
function ofk r across the two repositories. Without retrieving
project-specific knowledge (k r = 0), the agent achieves
62.3%. Performance improves steadily ask r increases, reach-
ing its peak atk r = 5(69.7%). Beyond this point, the full
retrieval condition drops slightly to 67.5%, suggesting that
lower-ranked skill records introduce redundant project-specific
knowledge that competes for the limited context window. Both
repositories show the same overall pattern, indicating that
a moderate number of retrieved skills is preferable across
different repository structures.
To evaluatek s, we varied the number of code segments
rewritten during issue synthesis on both repositories. With no
rewriting (ks = 0), the system reduces to the baseline (62.3%).
Rewriting a single segment (k s = 1) increases performance to
63.2%. Performance peaks atk s = 5, where each synthesized
issue exposes sufficiently rich project-specific knowledge by
involving multiple interacting repository entities. Increasing
ks to 7 results in a slight decrease, as larger perturbations
tend to generate overly complex issues that reduce the quality
of the distilled project-specific knowledge. The same trend
is consistently observed across repositories, suggesting that
functionality-level synthesis benefits from a moderate rewrit-
0
20
40
60
80
100Pass@1 (%)
+5.1% +5.3% +12.9%
-11.8%
+15.6%
-4.5%
+9.1%
+12.5%
+10.7%
+13.6%
+8.8% +9.4%
0.0%
+9.1%
DeepSeek V3.2
Django Sympy Sphinx Matplotlib Scikit-learn Astropy Pydata
0
20
40
60
80
100Pass@1 (%)
+1.0%
+2.9%
+2.3%
+5.9%
+15.6%
-9.1%
-2.0%
+7.4%
+2.7%
+6.8%
+8.8%
+15.6%
+13.6%
+9.1%
GPT 5 mini
Baseline SWE-Exp Ours
Fig. 5: Pass@1 performance comparison between Baseline and
our method across seven repositories.
ing scope rather than either single-segment perturbations or
overly broad rewrites.
Notably, across all settings ofk r andk s, SkillForge consis-
tently outperforms the baseline without project-specific knowl-
edge, demonstrating that proactively acquired project-specific
knowledge remains effective across a broad range of synthesis
and retrieval configurations.
Finding 3
Moderate synthesis and retrieval scales achieve the best
performance, while excessive knowledge generation or
retrieval introduces redundant information that slightly
degrades performance.
D. RQ4: Efficacy across Diverse Repositories
To assess whether SkillForge generalizes across differ-
ent repositories, we analyze performance at the repository
level. Due to space constraints, we report results for the
seven repositories with the largest numbers of evaluation
instances. Figure 5 compares three methods—Baseline, SWE-
Exp, and SkillForge—across these seven repositories under
both DeepSeek-V3.2 and GPT-5-mini.
SkillForge delivers improvements over the baseline on all
seven repositories under both backbones without any re-
gression. With DeepSeek-V3.2, the per-repo gains reach up
to +13.6% (Sphinx); under GPT-5-mini, gains reach up to
+15.6% (Scikit-learn). In contrast, SWE-Exp shows incon-
sistent behavior and suffers regressions on three repositories.
Under DeepSeek-V3.2, Matplotlib drops by−11.8% and
Astropy by−4.5%; under GPT-5-mini, Astropy regresses by
−9.1% and Pydata by−2.0%. Because SkillForge derives

Agent without Skills
Phase 1: Initial Exploration
•ls –la Understand repo structure
•find . -name "numberformat.py“ Locate problem file
•cat ./django/utils/numberformat.py Inspect code
Find：abs(exponent) + len(digits) > 200
Phase 2: Problem Analysis
Misunderstanding: Only look at exponent!
Phase 3: Solution Implementation
❌
❌Submission failed FAIL_TO_PASS: 0/2
Agent with Skills
Phase 1: Initial Exploration
find /testbed -name "numberformat.py"cat /testbed/django/utils/numberformat.py
💉Diagnostic Skills Injection
API: django/utils/numberformat.py
Purpose: Avoid premature string conversion
Playbook: Check format() type handling
Pay attention to isinstance(Decimal)
⚡Intervention Skills Triggered
KP1: Avoid premature Decimal-to-string→ Keep Decimal type for
comparisons
KP2: Do not miscompute use_grouping→ Mind
settings/configuration
KP3: Fast-path type checks matter→ Timing of type conversion is
critical
Phase 2: Problem Analysis•Setup Django environment，Created test scripts
•Analyze Decimal.as_tuple()
•Thought：If abs(exponent) >= decimal_pos should
return 0 to avoid scientific notation
•Thought (influenced by KP1): "Need to check if
absolute value < 10^(-decimal_pos)"Analyze
•Create test script: Run tests to confirm issue
⚡Key Insight:
Don’t only check exponent!
Compare actual value:
abs(number) < threshold
threshold = 10^(-decimal_pos)
Phase 3: Solution Implementation
KP1 guides using abs(number)
instead of abs(exponent)
This is the tipping point
between success and failure!
Phase 4: Thorough Testing
The actual problem is that:
abs(exponent) + len(digits) > 200 triggers scientific notation.
1e-199: sum = 200 (not > 200), does not trigger
1e-200: sum = 201 (> 200), triggers scientific notation
Boundary testing
✅1e-199 → '0.00'
✅1e-200 → '0.00'
✅-1e-200 → '-0.00'
✅1e-5, decimal_pos=2 → '0.00'
✅1e-5, decimal_pos=6 → '0.000010’
Comprehensive testing
✅Normal small decimals: 1.23456 → '1.23'
✅Large numbers: 1e200 still in scientific notation
✅Integers: 123 → '123.00'
✅Grouping: 1234567 → '1,234,567’
Extreme cases
✅1e-1000, decimal_pos=2 → '0.00'
✅1e-1001, decimal_pos=1000 → '0.' + 1000 zeros
✅Resolved: TRUE FAIL_TO_PASS: 2/2
Fig. 6: Case study fordjango-11206with and without project-specifc knowledge (represented as skills).
project-specific knowledge directly from each target repository
through self-distillation, the resulting knowledge naturally
reflects repository-specific APIs, implementation patterns, and
architectural organization. Representing this knowledge as
entity-grounded skills enables precise retrieval during down-
stream issue resolution, leading to consistently robust improve-
ments across diverse repositories.
Finding 4
SkillForge consistently improves Pass@1 across all evalu-
ated repositories without regression, demonstrating robust
gains from proactive project-specific knowledge acquisi-
tion.
E. Case Study
To provide a more concrete view of how SkillForge
changes the behavior of a repair agent, we present a case
study on Django issue #11206. The bug concerns format-
ting extremely smallDecimalvalues when a fixed num-
ber of decimal places is explicitly requested. In the buggy
version, callingnformat(Decimal("1e-200"), ".",
decimal_pos=2)returns"1.00e-200", i.e., scientific
notation, whereas users expect a fixed-point representation
such as"0.00". Correctly fixing this issue requires reasoning
about when a value should be treated as numerically zero at a
given precision, without breaking existing formatting behavior
for other magnitudes or types.
Figure 6 contrasts two repair trajectories on this issue using
the same GPT-5-mini backbone: one without project-specific
knowledge and one with SkillForge retrieving project-specific
knowledge in the form of entity-grounded skills. The baseline
agent locates the relevant formatting module and identifies the
condition responsible for scientific notation. It then adopts
a simple exponent-based heuristic to determine whether a
value should be treated as zero. Although this modification
fixes the observed failing example, it fails to capture the
repository’s intended numeric semantics and ultimately fails
all FAIL TO PASS tests (0/2).
In contrast, the skill-enhanced agent follows a longer
but more structured reasoning process. After accessing the
same module, the retrieved project-specific knowledge high-
lights two repository-specific insights: (i) preserve the ex-
istingDecimalformatting pipeline instead of introducing
alternative representations, and (ii) reason about numerical
equivalence using the repository’s precision semantics rather
than a simple exponent heuristic. Guided by these insights,
the agent derives a threshold-based solution that integrates
naturally with the existing formatting logic. It further validates
the implementation using representative boundary, precision-
sensitive, and extreme-value test cases before committing the
fix, ultimately passing all FAIL TO PASS tests (2/2).
This example illustrates how proactively acquired project-
specific knowledge reshapes the agent’s reasoning process dur-
ing issue resolution. With skill injection, the agent (i) adopts
a more faithful mathematical model of the bug (value-based
thresholdingversusexponent-based heuristics), (ii) preserves
important design constraints of the existing implementation
(e.g., maintainingDecimal-level operations and respecting

the original formatting path), and (iii) naturally gravitates
toward a test-driven workflow that exercises subtle edge cases.
In contrast, the baseline trajectory quickly converges to a
plausible but brittle local heuristic that fails under systematic
evaluation, underscoring the value of skill-enhanced reasoning
for non-trivial software bugs.
V. DISCUSSION
A. Quality of Distilled Skills and LLM-Generated Problem
Statements
We manually inspected the quality of the distilled skills and
synthesized problem statements. For the distilled skills, we
verified that they are grounded in the corresponding repository
entities, resolution trajectories, and golden patches, provid-
ing correct and actionable project-specific guidance without
hallucinated APIs or misleading advice. For the synthesized
problem statements, we verified that they faithfully describe
the observable failures induced by functionality-level rewriting
without leaking implementation details.
We also compared the issue-type distribution of synthesized
issues with that of real SWE-bench issues from the same
repositories. The two distributions do not overlap, suggesting
that the synthesized issues do not merely reproduce the same
categories of real issues used for evaluation. Instead, they
tend to expose finer-grained model biases in how the current
LLM uses project-specific functions, APIs, and cross-function
interactions. Thus, the benefit of SkillForge is less about
teaching the agent to solve similar issue types and more about
surfacing project-specific function-use pitfalls that can transfer
across different real issue categories.
B. Threats to Validity
a) External validity.:SkillForge relies on repository
tests to synthesize issues and distill project-specific knowl-
edge. Consequently, code regions that are rarely exercised
by runnable tests contribute fewer learning signals, which
may reduce the effectiveness of the learned knowledge in
repositories with limited test coverage.
b) Internal validity.:Following standard SWE-bench-
style synthetic instance synthesis pipelines [35]–[37], problem
statements for synthesized issues are generated using an LLM.
We manually verified that the synthesized failures correspond
to executable bugs induced by functionality-level rewriting
and that the generated descriptions correctly reflect observable
behaviors without leaking implementation details. However, as
in prior work, LLM-generated problem statements may still
differ from developer-written issue reports.
VI. RELATEDWORK
A. Project-Specific Knowledge for SWE Agents
Recent SWE agents [43]–[53] have increasingly moved
beyond one-shot issue solving towardself-evolvingbehavior,
where the agent improves by distilling reusable guidance from
prior histories, trajectories, and execution feedback. These
methods can be broadly grouped by the source of their
evolution signal. One line of work evolves from repository
history. EvoCoder [24] and SWE-Exp [2] accumulate past
interaction trajectories and distill abstract problem-solving
patterns to guide future tasks. ExpeRepair [26] organizes
previously resolved bugs into structured memories for later
patch generation, while MemGovern [25] harvests community
debugging traces from GitHub to improve the agent’s decision-
making process. Another line of work evolves from online tra-
jectories produced on the current instance. SWE-Debate [28]
iteratively strengthens solutions through multi-agent debate,
SAGE [27] abstracts high-level guidance from trial-and-error
grounding during test-time scaling, and Live-SWE-agent [29]
evolves its own runtime scaffold while solving the current task.
Unlike these reactive paradigms, SkillForge targets the cold-
start problem in project-specific issue resolution. Instead of
acquiring project-specific knowledge only after accumulating
repository history or online exploration trajectories, it proac-
tively derives such knowledge directly from the repository
by synthesizing project-specific issues, and represents this
knowledge as entity-grounded skills for future issue resolution.
B. SWE-Style Instance Synthesis
Recent work [54]–[56] has explored synthesizing software
issues or executable environments to improve software engi-
neering agents. Existing methods primarily view synthesized
instances as scalable training data. SWE-Smith [35] constructs
synthetic bug-fixing tasks by independently rewriting individ-
ual API-level functions. R2E-Gym [37] generates executable
SWE environments through test generation and commit back-
translation to support large-scale agent training. BugPilot [36]
synthesizes feature-development tasks that unintentionally in-
troduce bugs, producing realistic development scenarios for
subsequent model training.
In contrast, SkillForge uses synthetic issues for a fundamen-
tally different purpose: proactive project-specific knowledge
acquisition rather than training models. Instead of maximizing
the number or diversity of synthesized tasks, SkillForge aims
to expose project-specific knowledge that cannot be readily
inferred from static repositories alone. Its issue construction
also differs in granularity: rather than rewriting isolated API-
level functions, randomly selecting several functions for joint
rewriting, or generating new features, SkillForge starts from
repository-tested functionalities and uses test execution traces
to identify the code regions that jointly implement the same
functionality. Solving the resulting issues reveals how the
agent’s general coding priors diverge from project-specific
implementation patterns and API interactions.
VII. CONCLUSION
We presented SkillForge, a self-distillation framework for
addressing the cold-start problem in project-specific issue
resolution. Rather than relying on repository history or costly
per-issue test-time exploration, SkillForge proactively derives
project-specific knowledge directly from the repository by
synthesizing project-specific issues and distilling their reso-
lution trajectories. This knowledge is represented as a dual-
level, entity-grounded skill repository that supports future

issue resolution. Experiments demonstrate that SkillForge con-
sistently improves issue resolution performance, yielding ab-
solute Pass@1 gains of +5.8%/+5.6% on SWE-bench Verified
and +5.8%/+4.1% on SWE-bench Pro for DeepSeek-V3.2
and GPT-5-mini, respectively. Overall, our results suggest that
proactively acquiring project-specific knowledge before real
issue resolution is an effective and scalable alternative to reac-
tive acquisition from repository history or online exploration.
