record_id: s2_snowball:de09da5551d04a7e3643178b8a88b724414d5f3e
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2606.26969
fetched_title: Einstein World Models
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:56Z

Einstein World Models
Munachiso Samuel Nwadike 1,2, Zangir Iklassov 1, Ali Mekky 1
Zayd M. Kawakibi Zuhri 1, Kentaro Inui1,2,3
1MBZUAI 2RIKEN AIP, Japan 3Tohoku University
munachiso.nwadike@mbzuai.ac.ae
Abstract
Doesintelligencerequire the ability to rea-
son about phenomena beyond direct experi-
ence? It is natural to suspect that some com-
plex thought cannot be captured through lan-
guage alone. However, of particular concern to
this work, is whethervisualisingcounterfactual
events cancomplement languageas a mech-
anism for complex thought. We ask whether
LLMs can be trained to utilise such visualisa-
tion mechanisms, in a way that benefits their
reasoning abilities. Motivated by this question,
we proposeEinstein World Models. EWMs
are a blueprint for LLM-based reasoning sys-
tems that place visual-temporal rollouts inside
the reasoning trace, allowing them to reason in
ways that text alone may not support well. In an
EWM, the LLM calls aworld-module(not to be
confused with a world model), to produce short
rollouts of scenes under consideration. The re-
turned rollout is treated not as the answer, but
as an inspectable hypothesis that can support
later reasoning. Einstein World Models extend
the capability of LLMs for tool calling (such as
web search or code execution), into the domain
of visual thought experiments.
Prologue
A call for datasets becomes meaningful after the
desirable capability has been specified. This cul-
minates in Section 5. The predominance of this
work therefore aims to motivate a learnable format
for visual thought experimentation, proposing the
architecture and training objectives necessitating
their training data. This work may therefore be
understood as an operationalisation of a promising
capability whose data requirements are, per this
moment, a conceivably fertile frontier.
1 Introduction
Scientific invention often makes abstract ideas
tractable by turning them intothought experiments.
In a thought experiment, we visualise a scene, let it
unfold, and notice what changes.
Einstein’s recollection of special relativity be-
gins with precisely such a thought experiment, later
popularised through the image of Bern’s famous
clock tower. In hisAutobiographical Notes(Ein-
stein, 1949), he recalls imagining what it would
be like to chase a beam of light. If he could ac-
celerate until he matched the speed of the beam,
would it eventually appear to hang motionless be-
Figure 1: Einstein World Models(proposed) build upon traditional LLM reasoning traces. However, in addition to
generating tokens acrossN autoregressive steps, the model may, at a sparse set ofM intermediate steps, invoke a
callable world-module. The returned visual-temporal rollout becomes part of the trace as an inspectable hypothesis.
arXiv:2606.26969v1 [cs.AI] 25 Jun 2026

side him? In those notes, Einstein writes that such
a stationary light wave seemed impossible both
empirically and according to Maxwell’s equations.
His simple thought experiment hadtransformed
an abstract tensionbetween electrodynamics and
intuitions about motion, into a concrete scene upon
which reasoning could be built.
It is precisely in this spirit that “Einstein World
Models” invoke “ Einstein”. Vitally, the “E” in
EWM also carries a dual reading, overloaded to
mean “Externalised”. Externalisation brings the
thought experiment into view as an inspectable
reasoning trace component, and therefore, as a
measurable one (Nwadike et al., 2026), as per
chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022). LLMs can
already search the web when they lack reliable
facts (Nakano et al., 2021), run code when
numerical calculation is needed (Gao et al., 2023),
and call external tools when a task is easier to act
out than to solve from tokens alone (Schick et al.,
2023; Yao et al., 2023; Patil et al., 2024). What we
propose is to render LLMs capable of imagining a
scene, when quantitatively beneficial.
Hadamard (Hadamard, 1945), in his inquiry into
the inner mental processes behind mathematical in-
vention, recorded Einstein’s self-description of the
thought experiment process in strikingly imagistic
terms:
—Professor Albert Einstein(Hadamard, 1945)
“The psychical entities which seem to serve as
elements in [my] thought are certain signs and more
or less clear images which can be ‘voluntarily’ repro-
duced and combined.
. . . The above mentioned elements are, in
my case, of visual and some of muscular type.
Conventional words or other signs have to be sought
for laboriously only in a secondary stage, when the
mentioned associative play is sufficiently established
and can be reproduced at will. ”
In a thought experiment, the combination of vi-
suals, albeit subject to meaning, takes precedence,
while symbols and words play an augmentative
role. Although LLMs already excel with words and
symbols in chain-of-thought, their visual-temporal
reasoning faculties are yet to capture this dynamic
(kindly see Section 4). Thus, in an effort towards
precisely this dynamic, prior work has popularised
world models (LeCun et al., 2022).
These works often characterise world modelling
as either passive visual prediction from experience
(Bardes et al., 2024; Garrido et al., 2025), or action-
conditioned prediction for embodied agents (Mur-
Labadia et al., 2026; Nam et al., 2026; Maes et al.,
2026). However, if world models are treated mainly
as high-fidelity simulators of futures tethered either
to observed states or to chosen actions, then thought
experiments become correspondingly limited ei-
ther to experience, or to intervention (see Supple-
mentary Notes, Part C). Einstein World Models
reconsider this correspondence. Much like Ein-
stein could visualise riding beside a beam of light
without first having to ride one, a language model
should be able to benefit from imagining how a
described scene could unfold, without necessarily
acting within it.
A decisive element inEinstein World Modelsis
the choice of aworld-modulecapable of produc-
ing useful video thought experiment rollouts, as
discussed in Section 3. Equally central is the abil-
ity to integrate these rollouts back into the LLM’s
reasoning trace, as discussed in Section 2.
Our analysis of this element forms one of
three contributions: First, we propose Einstein
World Models as a mechanism for selective visual-
temporal thought experiments instantiated by tool-
use behavior in LLM reasoning. Second, we dis-
tinguish Einstein World Models as reasoning sys-
tems, from the world-modules they call, treating
generated rollouts as inspectable intermediate ar-
tifacts. Third, we offer dataset and training rec-
ommendations for training LLMs into Einstein
World Model reasoners, capable of utilising visual-
temporal thought-experiment traces.
2 Einstein World Models
2.1Overview
The objectives ofEinstein World Modelsare
twofold. First, we wish to imbue language models
with the ability to construct visualisations when
answering questions that require physical intuition
or scene-level visualisation. Second, we wish to ob-
tain a window into those visualisations. An EWM
rollout, as illustrated in Figure 1, is in effect, a visi-
ble hypothesis about how a described scene might
unfold.
LetT denote a reasoning trace, and letN denote
the number of autoregressive text-generation steps
in that trace. A standard CoT trace uses these N
steps to generate text alone. An Einstein World
Model also generates text autoregressively, but at
a sparse set of M intermediate generation steps,

CoT
Vision
Encoder
“If I chased light, would it stand still?”
VLM
VL-JEPA
Predictor
LLM
LLM
Minimise
Difference
—
Vision
Encoder
Text
Encoder
LLM
×N
×M
Question
Visuals
World- module
Visuals
Visuals
×N
“If I chased light,
would it stand still?”
“If I chased light, would it stand still?”
“If I chased
light, would it
stand still?”
EWM
Thoughts
Answer
Question
Question
Thoughts
Answer
Answer
Answer
Question
Figure 2:If Einstein were travelling away from the Bern clock tower at the speed of light, would the clock’s
hands appear frozen in time?This figure compares how different reasoning paradigms would support such a
thought experiment.Top left:In CoT, the LLM reasons only through N autoregressive text-generation steps.Top
right:In VLMs, visual information can condition generation, but the relevant visuals are externally provided,
rather than visualised during the reasoning trace.Bottom left:In VL-JEPA-style world models, predictive visual
representations are learned from observed visual inputs, but the visual prediction itself is not selectively invoked as
an intermediate reasoning artifact.Bottom right:InEinstein World Models, by contrast, the LLM (the reasoner)
preserves autoregressive text generation while taking responsibility for deciding when to invoke a world-module
M times, how to query it, and how to incorporate each returned rollout into subsequent reasoning. Each rollout
therefore enters the trace as a visible thought experiment rather than as a pre-given input or final answer.
queries a world-module. Each call to the world-
module produces a short video sequence, which
is then returned to the reasoner and used to con-
dition subsequent generation. Figure 2 contrasts
this structure with CoT, VLMs, and VL-JEPA-style
world models.
For problems in which Einstein World Models
are useful, we expect that
0<M≪N−1,
as the purpose of a rollout is not to replace the
chain-of-thought, but to externalise a visualised
scene, at moments where doing so facilitates sub-
sequent reasoning.

Once returned, the rollout becomes part of the
reasoning trace. The choice of prompt used to
query the world-module is therefore part of the
reasoning problem as well. As with web search, the
query helps determine what information is returned.
InEinstein World Models, the reasoner must learn
not only when to visualise, but how to query for the
visualised scene that will support later reasoning.
2.2Rollouts as Inspectable Hypotheses
Externalised thought makes latent assumptions vis-
ible (Nwadike et al., 2026).Einstein World Mod-
elsextend this principle from language to visual-
temporal reasoning. Instead of leaving the model’s
visualised scene implicit, the system renders that
scene as an examinable video artifact, for instance
as a sequence of frames.
Because this rollout is externalised, it can be
shared and studiedwithout access to model weights
or hidden activations. In this sense,Einstein World
Modelsturn an otherwise private visualised episode
into a public object of analysis, even when the
underlying model is not itself open to inspection.
Key here is the distinction between thein-
spectabilityof the world-module’s rollout, and the
physicalplausibilityof the rollout. A rollout is
not considered more plausible solely because it
is inspectable. Furthermore, the visual-temporal
rollout need not begin from physically ordinary
premises in order to be informative. Einstein’s own
light-chasing scene, for example, was not valuable
because it was itself a realisable experiment. To
the contrary, it wasconspicuously counterfactual.
However, it was valuable because it made a counter-
intuitive possibility precise enough to reason about.
Similarly, we neither treat the rendered visibility
of an EWM rollout as evidence of its plausibility,
nor its imperfections as evidence that it is uninfor-
mative. What matters is whether the hypothesis it
exposes can be inspected, tested, and improved.
2.3 Inference
At inference time, anEinstein World Modelis spec-
ified by two core components
πθ andW.
Here,πθ denotes theEinstein reasoner, a trainable
LLM policy parameterised by θ, andW denotes
the world-module.πθ generates a reasoning trace
and may queryW for visual-temporal rollouts. If
queried,W generates these video rollouts, and re-
turns them toπθ for further autoregression.
For a text-only input problemx, inference con-
structs a thought trace with the initialisation
T0 =x,
such thatTt then denotes the partial trace after step
t. At each step, the Einstein reasoner defines a con-
ditional distribution over the next model-generated
segment,
πθ(·|T t).
A generated segment is either a non-tool segment
st, such as language reasoning or a final answer,
or a world-module query segment qt. If a query
qt is generated, the world-module returns a visual-
temporal rollout
vt∼W(q t).
The trace update is therefore
Tt+1 =T t⊕
(
st,ifWis not queried,
[qt,vt],ifWis queried. (1)
Thus, ordinary text segments are appended directly
to the trace, while world-module calls append the
reasoner-generated query, concatenated with the
returned rollout observation. If the generated seg-
ment is a final answer, inference terminates and
returns that answer.
In implementation, these trace segments
can be serialised with special tags, format-
ted similarly to recent RL-based tool-use sys-
tems for search and agentic tool interaction
(Jin et al., 2025; Singh et al., 2025). An
EWM trace may use <think>...</think>
for language reasoning, <tool_call>{“name”:
“world_module”, “query”: q}</tool_call>
for a world-module query,<visual_rollout>...
</visual_rollout> for the returned visual-
temporal rollout, and <answer>...</answer> for
the final answer.
The <visual_rollout> segment is returned by
W. In practice,W may render a short sequence of
frames, which can be encoded into visual tokens
for incorporation into the reasoning trace. The
rendered frames remain available for inspection,
while the visual tokens provide the representation
consumed by the reasoner.
2.4 Training
At the initial stage, the reasoner undergoes super-
vised fine-tuning on EWM trace formats with stan-
dard next-token cross-entropy, masking returned

rollout observations from the loss as detailed in the
Supplementary Notes, part A.
Consistent with standard practice in recent
reasoning-model training (Guo et al., 2025), we
then recommend following SFT with RLVR-style
training over complete EWM trajectories, since
target tasks provide verifiable final answers even
when intermediate visual thought experiments re-
main unlabeled. RL-based tool use already pro-
vides a standard methodology for training LLMs to
call fixed external systems, such as search engines,
and incorporate their returned outputs (Jin et al.,
2025; Qian et al., 2025; Singh et al., 2025).
Formally, letD={(x i,y⋆
i )}n
i=1 be a dataset of
text-only problemsxi with verifiable final answers
y⋆
i . A sampled EWM trajectory is a completed
thought traceT containing all language-reasoning
segments, world-module queries, returned rollouts,
and the final answerˆy.
Let r(ˆy,y⋆) denote the verifier reward for the
final answer. For exact-answer tasks, this may sim-
ply ber(ˆy,y⋆) =1[ˆy=y ⋆].
Since world-module calls may be computation-
ally expensive and should be used selectively, we
define an EWM reward that combines final-answer
correctness with an optional additional reward term
for world-module usage.
rM(T,y ⋆) =r(ˆy,y⋆) +rW(T).(2)
Here,rW(T) denotes the optional implementation-
dependent reward for world-module calling behav-
ior in the trace. We address this reward in Sec-
tion 2.4.1.
A GRPO-style implementation (Shao et al.,
2024) can optimise this reward with a clipped sur-
rogate. For each training pair (x,y⋆)∼D , sample
G complete EWM rollouts τ1:G ={τ i}G
i=1 using
the frozen old reasonerπ old with access toW.
Letri =rM(τi,y⋆). The group-relative advan-
tage of rolloutiis
Ai = ri−¯r
sr +ϵ adv
,
where ¯randsr are the mean and standard deviation
of theri withinτ 1:G.
Letτi = (zi1,...,z iLi) denote the serialized tra-
jectory, whereLi is its length andzit is the token at
positiont. Also let 1 it = 1 for policy-generated to-
kens and 1 it = 0 for returned rollout observations.
DefineLg
i =PLi
t=1 1 it, and, for generated tokens,
ρit = πθ(zit|τ i,<t)
πold(zit|τ i,<t).
Writing clipϵ(r) = clip(r,1−ϵ,1 +ϵ) , the EWM
training objective is
JE(θ) =E x,τ 1:G
"
1
G
GX
i=1
1
Lg
i
LiX
t=1
1 it
min(ρitAi,clip ϵ(ρit)Ai)
−βD KL(πθ∥πref)
#
.
(3)
Here,πref is the original pre-RL LLM used as
a reference policy, and β≥0 controls the KL
penalty that discourages drift from it.
Feasibility.Prior work suggests that language
models can acquire structured representations of
space, time, colour, and other real-world variables
from language alone (Gurnee and Tegmark, 2024;
Huh et al., 2024). The LLM already contains much
of the world knowledge needed to query a world-
module effectively. Thus, the remaining task is
not necessarily fresh pretraining from scratch, but
targeted post-training. Furthermore, autoregressive
reasoning and video rollouts share a forward tem-
poral structure. A chain of thought advances token
by token, while a visualised scene advances frame
by frame. The unidirectional nature of autoregres-
sion is surprisingly robust in practice (Nwadike
et al., 2025). It is also reflected in models that com-
bine autoregressive prediction with latent diffusion
sampling (Parker-Holder et al., 2024).
2.4.1Selective Thought Experiments
The rW term is intended to encourage selective
world-module use. IfrW(T) = 0 , then selectivity
can be learned solely through the final-answer re-
ward, as in Jin et al. (2025) and Qian et al. (2025).
Emerging evidence, however, suggests that shaping
rewards beyond final-answer correctness can en-
courage more specific behaviours, from improved
reasoning to more efficient tool use (Guo et al.,
2025; Chen et al., 2026; Wang et al., 2025). For
example, one may set rW(T) =−λM(T)/B ,
where M(T) counts world-module calls, B is a
call budget, and λ≥0 controls the penalty for
excessive calling.
Upon choice of rW, Algorithm 1 summarises
how the resulting rewardrM may be utilised during
training. OptimisingJE in Eq. 3 converts this trace-
level reward into group-relative advantages over
complete EWM trajectories. Traces where a visual
thought experiment proves useful enough to justify
its world-module usage receive higher advantages,

while unnecessary or unhelpful calls receive lower
advantages. The reasoner therefore learns when to
queryWand how to use the returned rollout.
Algorithm 1Proposed EWM RLVR protocol
Require: DatasetD, reasonerπθ, reference policy
πref, world-moduleW, group sizeG
1:foreach GRPO update rounddo
2:Set frozen old policyπ old←π θ
3:Sample training batch fromD
4:foreach(x,y ⋆)in the batchdo
5:SampleGtrajectoriesτ 1:G
usingπ old with access toW
6:foreach trajectoryτ i do
7:Generate<think>,<tool_call>,
or<answer>segments
8:ifthe world-module is invokedthen
9:CallWwith the query
in<tool_call>
10:Append rollout as a
<visual_rollout>segment
11:end if
12:Compute rewardr i =r M(τi,y⋆)
13:end for
14:Compute group-relative advantagesA i
15:end for
16:Compute importance weightsρ it
over reasoner-generated tokens
17:Mask returned visual-rollout observations
from the policy loss
18:Updateπ θ by maximisingJE in Eq. 3
19:end for
3World-Module Selection
Since RLVR optimises the reasoner’s use of the
world-module rather than the world-module itself,
the question becomes how to select a module that
produces useful visual-temporal thought experi-
ments.
3.1 Architecture
World-modules may come in several forms. We
modify recent informal taxonomies (Li and Labs,
2026) of worldmodelsto distinguish candidate
world-modules:
1. Renderers: return observations, such as images
or video frames. InEWMs, renderers are the
default world-modules. Text-to-video genera-
tors, or image-to-video generators used within a
text-to-image pipeline, are of particular interest.
This includes (but is not limited to) diffusion and
flow-matching video models, provided their roll-
outs expose information that can support later
reasoning (Kong et al., 2024; Wan Team et al.,
2025; HaCohen et al., 2024).
2. Simulators: allow the reasoner to intervene in
a visualised world and observe what follows.
Interactive world models such as Genie-style
systems provide one example of this interface
(Bruce et al., 2024; Parker-Holder et al., 2024),
and benchmarks such as WBench suggest that
the coherence of such interactive rollouts can be
measured (Ying et al., 2026). However, in prac-
tice, repeated renderer calls may play the role
of a simulator, making arenderer(aforemen-
tioned) the primary world-module of interest.
In particular, the LLM can inspect one visu-
alised consequence, revise its hypothesis, and
then request another rollout from a modified
condition or counterfactual premise. Simulators
are therefore useful when a thought experiment
requires explicit intervention, but they are not
required for the centralEinstein World Model
mechanism.
3. Planners: InEinstein World Models, planning
remains the role of the LLM reasoner, since the
aim is visual-temporal reasoning over thought
experiment sequences, rather than embodied
robotic action.
3.2 World-Module Quality
Einstein’s visual thought experiments were disci-
plined by strong physical intuition. A generated
video rollout may therefore only be as useful as
the physical intuitions sustained by its underlying
video model.
Diffusion models remain strong candidates be-
cause their intuitive-physics quality can be mea-
sured through human-verifiable likelihood esti-
mates derived from the denoising objective of the
diffusion model. Yuan et al. (2025) use precisely
this technique to find substantial differences be-
tween video diffusion models, with stronger perfor-
mance from recent systems. Some video genera-
tors remain unreliable physical simulators (Bansal
et al., 2025; Zhang et al., 2025; Motamed et al.,
2026). However, not all diffusion models are equal,
and the frontier is fast-improving. Recent physics-
aware generators further suggest that explicit dy-
namical priors can improve physical consistency
and controllability (Yuan et al., 2026).
Einstein World Models also require rollout faith-
fulness. A faithful rollout exposes information that
the reasoner actually uses and that the final answer

depends on. An unfaithful rollout, much like in tra-
ditional chain-of-thought, may not reveal the com-
putation that produced the answer (Turpin et al.,
2023; Lanham et al., 2023). The response is not
to abandon the need for video rollout traces, but to
evaluate and improve their faithfulness (Nwadike
et al., 2026).
3.3Ensembling
Einstein World Models already allow repeated
world-module calls within a single reasoning trace.
Here,ensemblingextends beyond repeated calls
to a single module to describe the comparison of
visual hypotheses generated by different world-
modules, much as different humans may visualise
the same problem differently. One module may
favour visual realism, another physical consistency,
and another temporal continuity. Because rollouts
are externalised, these assumptions can be com-
pared rather than left hidden. The problem is there-
fore not only to select a strong world-module, but to
select modules whose inductive biases are usefully
different.
Inensembling, different LLM reasoners, at-
tached to different world-modules, exchange roll-
outs and critiques before answering. Each rollout
proposes a different interpretation of the scene, and
disagreement reveals what must be inspected next.
4 Related Work
Chain-of-thought (Wei et al., 2022) made interme-
diate reasoning visible, but made it visible only as
language. Many commonsense questions depend
on variables that text traces represent poorly, in-
cluding object identity, containment, contact, heat,
motion, and material state. Humans often reason
about such variables through visualisation. Ein-
stein World Models seek to provide an analogous
capability for language models by treating visu-
alised visual episodes as intermediate reasoning
artifacts.
Whiteboard-of-Thought (Menon et al., 2024)
is a notable procedural predecessor for Einstein
World Models. It gives a multimodal model a vi-
sual scratchpad, asks it to draw intermediate rea-
soning steps as an image, often through code, and
then feeds that image back into the model for final
reasoning. Einstein World Models preserve this
feedback loop, but change the artifact from a static
drawing to a short video rollout that serves as a
visual play-through of a hypothesis.
Hu et al. (2024) similarly give multimodal LMs
an external visual sketchpad for intermediate rea-
soning. However, the resulting artifacts are mainly
static visual annotations (auxiliary lines, bounding
boxes, segmentation masks, etc.) produced through
programmatic tools, rather than visual-temporal
rollouts.
Wu et al. (2024) propose Visualization-of-
Thought (V oT), a related method for spatial reason-
ing in LLMs. However, V oT focuses on controlled
2D grid-world tasks rather than real-world visual-
temporal thought experiments. Its visualisations
remain text-form grids or maps, not separate visual-
temporal rollouts. Thus, V oT is best understood as
a prompting strategy for symbolic state tracking,
whereas the aim of Einstein World Models is to let
a reasoner call a world-module and incorporate the
resulting rollout into its trace.
In other work, Chern et al. (2025) showed that
when generating an image from a prompt, interme-
diate visual subgoals can guide the model toward a
better final image. However, their work focused on
the objective of image generation as the end goal,
rather than enhanced reasoning as the end goal (the
latter being merely facilitated by visualisation as a
means to an end).
Tong et al. (2025) study whether video gen-
eration models can reason by producing answer-
bearing videos. Einstein World Models pursue a
different research objective. Rather than asking
whether the video generator can serve as the rea-
soner, EWMs ask whether an LLM can use video
generation as a thought experiment tool. In other
words, rather than replacing the LLM with a video
generator, we ask how frontier LLMs can decide
when visualisation is useful, selectively invoke the
world-module, and integrate the resulting rollout
back into reasoning.
Yang et al. (2025) and Yu et al. (2026) explore
the importance of visualisation for 3D spatial rea-
soning in VQA-style settings, where the model
begins from an observed image and generates addi-
tional views to answer questions about that scene.
This differs from the setting of interest here, where
thought experiments are used to support text-based
reasoning problems and the model must decide,
as part of its own reasoning process, when visual-
temporal rollouts are useful.
We discuss the relationship between Einstein
World Models and contemporary agentic LLM sys-
tems in the Supplementary Notes, Part B.

5 Future Work: A Call for Datasets
A central bottleneck for Einstein World Models is
data. Few existing datasets explicitly target the
behaviour Einstein World Models require. The
missing setting is neither ordinary text reasoning,
nor visual question answering over an already pro-
vided image. It is a setting in which an LLM is
fully capable of taking in text alone as input (even
without the aid of visual inputs, when requested),
and can perform a visual thought experiment in
its reasoning trace before outputting final answer
tokens. This makes dataset construction the imme-
diate experimental bottleneck for Einstein World
Models, since the core learning problem still lacks
a suitable benchmark.
SimpleBench is one of the rare public datasets
pointing in this direction. However, the full dataset
contains only a little over 200 questions, while its
public release exposes only 10, making it useful as
an illustration, rather than as a training corpus. The
questions in SimpleBench are short and text-only,
yet difficult, because answering them correctly of-
ten depends on performing a thought experiment
about how a described scene unfolds. Consider the
following example:
SimpleBench(Philip and Hemang, 2024)
Test Sample #2
Question:A juggler throws a solid blue ball a meter
in the air and then a solid purple ball (of the same size)
two meters in the air. She then climbs to the top of
a tall ladder carefully, balancing a yellow balloon on
her head. Where is the purple ball most likely now, in
relation to the blue ball?
A. at the same height as the blue ball
B. at the same height as the yellow balloon
C. inside the blue ball
D. above the yellow balloon
E. below the blue ball
F. above the blue ball
Correct Answer:A.
What makes this question difficult for LLMs is
that it requires visualising the scene, and realising
that, although the purple ball is thrown higher than
the blue ball, enough time passes for both solid
balls to fall back down before any juggler could
possibly finish climbing a ladder while carefully
balancing a balloon on their head. A text-only LLM
may over-formalise the prompt and conclude that
the answer depends on unspecified variables such
as launch velocity or climbing time. However, a
one- or two-metre throw lasts only moments, while
carefully climbing a tall ladder takes long enough
for ordinary solid balls to land. An EWM rollout
would externalise such a missing visual-temporal
computation, allowing it to become part of the rea-
soning trace.
Existing physical reasoning datasets are valu-
able, but many begin with the relevant scene al-
ready available. Some focus on two-dimensional
puzzle images (Bakhtin et al., 2019). Others ask
models to explain, predict, or judge physical events
in supplied video clips (Yi et al., 2020; Bear et al.,
2021; Riochet et al., 2018; Bordes et al., 2025).
Still, others focus on the physical fidelity of video
generators. Even then, the visual scene is supplied
in advance, either as initial frames to complete,
or as rendered samples to score (Upadhyay et al.,
2026; Yuan et al., 2025). By contrast, Einstein
World Models need datasets where the problem be-
gins as language, and the model must decide, for
itself, whether to generate a visualisation.
We therefore make an open call for datasets in
this setting. Ideally, such datasets should contain
both problems that benefit from visual thought ex-
periments, and problems that do not, allowing Ein-
stein World Models to learn not only how to visu-
alise, but also when not to.
Epilogue
This paper proposed Einstein World Models, for
treating visual thought experiments as a tool-use
behaviour in LLM reasoning. The central idea is
that some questions require a model to visualise
how a described scene unfolds, and that this may
be poorly supported by language alone. EWMs
keep the LLM as the reasoner, but allow it to call a
world-module, render a short visual-temporal roll-
out, and return that rollout to the reasoning trace
before answering. A video rollout is not assumed
to be a perfect simulation, but rather a visual hy-
pothesis about how a described situation may un-
fold. Its distinctive usefulness comes from being
externalised, making the model’s reasoning process
available for inspection and debugging. The path
forward thus requires both better world-module
curation, as well as better datasets to allow for
training LLMs on when and how thought experi-
ments should be invoked. In this sense, Einstein
World Models point toward language models that
reason not only through words and symbols, but
through externalised visual walk-throughs.

Supplementary Notes
ASupervised Finetuning
Before reinforcement learning, the Einstein rea-
soner may be warm-started with supervised fine-
tuning on valid EWM trace formats using a stan-
dard cross-entropy loss. This stage teaches the syn-
tax and role structure of EWM reasoning traces,
including ordinary language reasoning, world-
module query segments, returned visual-rollout
observations, and final-answer segments. For ex-
ample, traces may use <think> for language rea-
soning, <tool_call> for world-module queries,
<visual_rollout> for returned observations, and
<answer>for final answers.
Let
DSFT ={(x i,T ⋆
i )}i
be a supervised dataset of input problems and target
EWM traces. Each traceT ⋆
i contains both reasoner-
generated segments and observation segments re-
turned by the world-module. The model is trained
with standard next-token cross-entropy, but only on
tokens generated by the reasoner. Returned visual
rollouts are observations, not policy actions, and
are therefore masked from the supervised loss.
Let z⋆
t denote the target token at position t in
the serialized traceT ⋆. Let 1 t = 1 ifz⋆
t is a tar-
get token that the reasoner is expected to produce,
and let 1 t = 0 ifz⋆
t is part of a returned rollout
observation. The masked supervised fine-tuning
loss is:
LSFT(θ) =
− E
(x,T ⋆)∼DSFT

1P
t 1 t
X
t
1 t logπθ

z⋆
t|T ⋆
<t

!
.
Thus, supervised fine-tuning prepares the Ein-
stein reasonerπθ for RLVR by teaching it the for-
mat of valid EWM traces, while RLVR teaches
when and why such traces should contain visual
thought experiments. Crucially,DSFT should in-
clude both call and no-call traces, so that the model
learns the world-module interface without learning
to invokeWby default.
BRelation to Agentic Systems
Modern LLM agents are commonly understood as
language models augmented with additional ma-
chinery for tool use, planning, environment inter-
action, or action execution on behalf of a user (Yao
et al., 2023; Shen et al., 2023). However, although
an EWM can be incorporated into an agentic sys-
tem, it is not necessarily an agent in itself. Such
systems may qualify as Einstein World Models
when they use a world-module to generate visual-
temporal rollouts as intermediate reasoning arti-
facts, but not merely by virtue of being agents. Ex-
isting agentic systems can call tools, but they do not
by default perform externalised visual thought ex-
periments in the sense proposed here. Conversely,
an Einstein World Model need not have the broader
infrastructure of a general-purpose agent for exe-
cuting user-facing actions, such as managing soft-
ware repositories or querying databases. It may be
implemented as a language reasoner that calls a
world-module only to imagine a described scene,
inspect the resulting rollout, and incorporate it into
its reasoning trace. In this sense, EWMs describe a
reasoning capability that can either stand alone, or
be added to agentic systems.
CRelation to Other World Models
The termworld modelhas a long history in AI,
especially in model-based reinforcement learning,
where learned models of environment dynamics
support planning, control, and interaction with an
environment (Sutton, 1991; Ha and Schmidhuber,
2018). In this lineage, a world model helps an
agent anticipate possible futures before acting in
the external world. More recent proposals similarly
treat world models as central components of au-
tonomous systems that learn to predict, reason, and
plan over future states (LeCun et al., 2022).
Einstein World Models shift the emphasis from
the notion of a worldmodelto that of a world-
module. An EWM is not itself a learned dynamics
model, simulator, or video generator. It is a reason-
ing system in which the LLM remains the reasoner
and calls the world-module when a visual-temporal
thought experiment may support its reasoning trace.
The world-module is the component most closely
aligned with what is traditionally the predictive
component of a world model. It need not be a full
3D simulator, and is treated only as a component
of a reasoning system. Its role in an EWM is to
supply an inspectable rollout rather than to replace
the LLM’s reasoning process.
This distinction also shifts what must be learned.
Whereas many world-model architectures focus on
modelling environmental dynamics, EWMs focus
on how a reasoner should selectively invoke visual-
isation to facilitate reasoning.
