record_id: s2_snowball:53ed4cb969fc1d01c2c4b4796d337ec61f3fc525
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2311.07491
fetched_title: A Step Closer to Comprehensive Answers: Constrained Multi-Stage Question Decomposition with Large Language Models
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:08:39Z

A Step Closer to Comprehensive Answers: Constrained Multi-Stage
Question Decomposition with Large Language Models
Hejing Cao1∗, Zhenwei An 1∗, Jiazhan Feng 1, Kun Xu 2, Liwei Chen 2, Dongyan Zhao 1†
1 Peking University 2 Kuaishou Technology
{caohejing,anzhenwei,fengjiazhan,zhaody}@pku.edu.cn
Abstract
While large language models exhibit remark-
able performance in the Question Answering
task, they are susceptible to hallucinations.
Challenges arise when these models grapple
with understanding multi-hop relations in com-
plex questions or lack the necessary knowl-
edge for a comprehensive response. To address
this issue, we introduce the "Decompose-and-
Query" framework (D&Q). This framework
guides the model to think and utilize exter-
nal knowledge similar to ReAct, while also
restricting its thinking to reliable information,
effectively mitigating the risk of hallucinations.
Experiments confirm the effectiveness of D&Q:
On our ChitChatQA dataset, D&Q does not
lose to ChatGPT in 67% of cases; on the Hot-
PotQA question-only setting, D&Q achieved
an F1 score of 59.6%. Our code is available at
https://github.com/alkaidpku/DQ-ToolQA .
1 Introduction
Large language models (LLMs), such as ChatGPT
(OpenAI, 2022), GPT-4 (OpenAI, 2023), Bard
(Google, 2023), have made significant inroads into
people’s work and daily life, substantially enhanc-
ing productivity. For LLMs, to produce high-
quality response for a complex question relies on
two essential capabilities: 1) Understanding multi-
hop reasoning in complex questions; 2) Employing
external knowledge.
On the one hand, many questions in our daily
lives manifest as multi-hop questions. Individu-
als often pose intricate questions or instructions
within a single sentence, lacking necessary de-
scriptions. This necessitates LLMs to proficiently
decompose complex questions into multiple sub-
questions. One potential solution involves employ-
ing a sub-question decomposition approach, such
as self-ask (Press et al., 2022), which decomposes
*Equal Contribution.
†Corresponding author.
the question into sub-questions, resolves them inde-
pendently, and consolidates the answers. However,
this approach relies on LLMs’ ability to reasonably
decompose questions and is typically more suit-
able for high-quality prompts, such as HotPotQA
(Yang et al., 2018) and 2WikiMultiHopQA (Ho
et al., 2020). Challenges may arise when dealing
with low-quality or unclear prompts.
On the other hand, large language models are
prone to hallucinations (Zhang et al., 2023b) and do
not have access to up-to-date knowledge (Mallen
et al., 2023). Integrating external tools (search en-
gines, knowledge bases, APIs, and etc) with LLMs
is a viable approach to address these challenges.
Least-to-most (Zhou et al., 2022) decomposes com-
plex question into sub-questions, ultimately leading
to a comprehensive answer. However, answering
these sub-questions may also bring hallucinations.
ReAct (Yao et al., 2022) bridges the gap of rea-
soning and action, enabling thoughtful interactions
with tools. It is noteworthy that the action space of
ReAct is limited, and its effectiveness is relatively
modest. Shao et al. (2023a) introduced Iter-RetGen,
which iteratively follows a two-step process: re-
trieving relevant knowledge, and generating answer.
The approach of Iter-RetGen bears similarities to
Self-Refine (Madaan et al., 2023). However, Iter-
RetGen lacks autonomous termination capabilities.
To this, we have proposed a constrained question
decomposition strategy that transforms question de-
composition into a "Decompose-and-Query" depth-
first search framework. Specifically, we construct
a reliable question-answer base, which consists of
high-quality question-answer pairs. The model is
required to consult it to generate answers for search
efficiency. In case of conflicts between the model’s
knowledge and the reliable QA base, the base’s
content takes precedence.
We annotated solution trajectories for fine-tuning
the model and subsequent predictions. The super-
vised fine-tuning phase does not involve tool in-
arXiv:2311.07491v1 [cs.CL] 13 Nov 2023

vocation; the model processes static dialogue text,
learning strategies for invoking tools. During the
prediction phase, the model calls external tools to
query a reliable QA base. If the LLM realizes
during the search process that it has pursued an
incorrect path, it can backtrack to previous steps
and initiate a new search. Experiments confirm
the effectiveness of D&Q: On our ChitChatQA
dataset, D&Q does not lose to ChatGPT in 67%
of cases; on the HotPotQA question-only setting,
D&Q achieved an F1 score of 59.6%.
Our contributions are the following:
1. We build and make public a dataset of real
conversation scenarios: ChitChatQA.
2. We design a framework for LLMs using ex-
ternal tools to perform constrained problem
decomposition. Although simple, it can theo-
retically be extended to any number of exter-
nal tools.
3. We achieve an F1 score of 59.6% on the
question-only setting on HotPotQA dataset.
2 Related Works
Reasoning. The capacity for logical reasoning is
a significant hallmark of intelligence in large lan-
guage models. Wei et al. (2022) have proposed the
Chain-of-Thought (CoT) as an effective means to
enhance the reasoning abilities of large language
models consistently and efficiently. However, in-
correct reasoning paths often lead to incorrect rea-
soning results. To this, Wang et al. (2022) suggest
self-consistency, which samples a diverse set of
reasoning paths and selects the most consistent an-
swer. Self-consistency, despite its higher decoding
cost compared to CoT, still struggles with challeng-
ing problem-solving. Yao et al. (2023) introduce
a novel approach by extending CoT into Tree-of-
Thought (ToT). At each step, the model engages in
self-evaluation and, when necessary, looks ahead
or backtracks to enhance decision-making abilities.
Similarly, Graph of Thoughts (GoT) framework
models information generated by large language
models as a graph, allowing for the combination of
various LLM thoughts to yield collaborative results,
extract insights from the entire thought network,
and employ feedback loops to enhance thinking
(Besta et al., 2023). Cumulative reasoning (Zhang
et al., 2023a) employs proposers, verifiers, and re-
porters to store intermediate results, facilitating the
accumulation of the reasoning process. So far, the
reasoning capabilities of large language models
have remained understudied.
Augmented Language Models. Large language
models are prone to generating hallucinations and
do not have access to up-to-date knowledge. Large
language models are likely to make factual errors
with long-tail knowledge (Kandpal et al., 2022).
As a consequence, more and more research is fo-
cusing on the use of external tools to enhance large
language models. Retrieval-based language model
is a classic augmented language model. The idea
is to use discrete or dense retrievers to retrieve
related context, and then merge the retrieved con-
text into the input. It is possible to match certain
capabilities of some of the largest LMs while hav-
ing less parameters (Schick et al., 2023; Qin et al.,
2023). Along with the research on CoT, many stud-
ies have integrated external tools into the chain
of thought paradigm (Yao et al., 2022; Paranjape
et al., 2023; Feng et al., 2023; Press et al., 2022;
Shao et al., 2023b; Trivedi et al., 2022; Gou et al.,
2023a,b). Synergizing reasoning and invocation
tools in LLMs is an underexplored potential re-
search domain.
3 Methodology
This section presents our methodology. We con-
struct ChitChatQA and the reliable QA base, anno-
tate problem-solving trajectories and train a model
to invoke tools.
3.1 ChitChatQA dataset
We introduce a novel dataset, ChitChatQA, to as-
sess the capabilities of large language models in
handling complex and diverse questions. Specifi-
cally, we collected single-turn dialogue data from
real scenarios in the KwaiTalk application. The
dataset comprises authentic questions posed by
users and responses generated by large language
models. We denote the original question-answer
data asS0 = (qi,a i)N0.
We performed data cleaning on the collected
question-answer dataset to eliminate noise. Specifi-
cally, we initially utilized a grammatical correction
model to filter out questions with low scores, fol-
lowed by an intent recognition model to screen for
questions with ambiguous intent. During the data
cleaning process, we applied a lower intent recog-
nition threshold to retain data with unclear intents.
The detailed procedure for data cleaning can be
found in Algorithm 1.

Figure 1: Example of question decomposition trajectory. Q: Question; I: Iteration. Dashed line means rollback. We
use Ques_Ret for QuestionRetriever and Ans_Ret for AnswerRetriever for brevity.
Algorithm 1 Reliable QA Database Creation
Require: S0,ϵ1,ϵ2, GEC, Intent
Ensure: S
1: S = new Set()
2: forqi inS0 do
3: if GEC(qi)>ϵ 1 and Intent(qi)>ϵ 2 then
4: S.Add(qi)
5: end if
6: end for
7: returnS
3.2 Reliable QA Base
We constructed a reliable question-answer base,
which consists of high-quality question-answer
pairs. Similar to Constitutional AI (Bai et al.,
2022), all question-answer pairs are considered
beyond doubt. The model is required to consult the
database to generate answers. In case of conflicts
between the model’s knowledge and the reliable
QA base, the base’s content takes precedence. We
believe that this makes the model less prone to
hallucinations and more robust.
In dialogue system, users may inquire about sim-
ilar questions, such as "please provide me with a
Python code for Bubble Sort" or "tell me the names
of the Eight Great Masters of the Tang and Song
dynasties". These generic questions are frequent.
Preliminary analysis shows that these questions
exhibit high quality. Therefore, we selected the
top 50,000 questions based on their frequency as
benchmark questions for the reliable QA base.
Due to the fact that the pretraining data for large
language models comprises noise, the outputs for
the same question may vary. We categorized the
questions into several types. Objective factual ques-
tions demand precise and unique responses. For
these questions, we employ a majority voting ap-
proach to determine the response. Subjective opin-
ion questions pertain to opinions or perspectives
on certain matters, and for such questions, we use
an opinion aggregation method to determine the
response. Consequently, we designed an answer ag-
gregation model to consolidate diverse viewpoints.
The answer aggregation model is essentially
a large language model through supervised fine-
tuning. We manually annotated 5,000 answer ag-

Figure 2: Model architecture of HotPotQA.
gregation instances. Leveraging the LLaMA2-13b
model as the base, we fine-tuned the model on the
aforementioned data to create the answer aggrega-
tion model. Subsequently, we performed answer
aggregation on all the question-answer pairs in the
reliable question-answer base.
For examples of answer aggregation, please refer
to Appendix A.
3.3 Trajectory Annotation
To train the model to invoke external tools, we need
gather a sufficient amount of data for supervised
fine-tuning. Both ChatGPT and GPT-4 exhibit
excellent performance in data annotation (Ubani
et al., 2023). Based on preliminary experiments,
the annotation capabilities of ChatGPT are signifi-
cantly inferior to those of GPT-4. The annotation
framework is illustrated in Figure 1.
3.4 Adaptive Constraint Question
Decomposition
We employ imitation learning using data that in-
volves multiple iterations of calling an external
retriever for fine-tuning large language models.
We use LLaMA2-13b as base model. The train-
ing is conducted in a multi-turn dialogue format,
wherein, in each training round, only the output
of that round’s dialogue is retained, and the rest
is masked. For more details, please refer to the
Experimental Section.
4 Experiments
Our primary experiments consist of two parts. To
evaluate question decomposition capability, experi-
ments were conducted on the ChitChatQA dataset.
To assess the effectiveness of our approach in an-
swering multi-hop questions, experiments were
conducted using the academic dataset HotPotQA.
4.1 ChitChatQA
We utilized a set of 200 training instances and con-
ducted supervised fine-tuning in a multi-turn di-
alogue format on LLaMA2-13b. The supervised
fine-tuning phase does not involve tool invocation;
the model processes static dialogue text, learning
strategies for invoking tools. During the predic-
tion phase, the model calls external tools to query
the reliable QA base. We defined three tools:
[QuestionRetriever] for retrieving related ques-
tions from the QA base, [AnswerRetriever] for
retrieve answer to a question, and [Finish] indi-
cating task termination.
ChitChatQA’s data stems from real dialogue in-
teractions with the Kuaishou dialogue model, with
a test set comprising 100 instances. We employed
the Kuaishou dialogue model’s output as a baseline,
noted as "KwaiDialog", and compared it with Chat-
GPT’s output. Model evaluation was conducted
through human assessments labeled as win/tie/lose,
as shown in Table 1.

Method Generation Model Model Size EM F1
Standard PaLM 540B 21.9 36.8
CoT (Wei et al., 2023) PaLM 540B 30.0 44.1
ReAct (Yao et al., 2022) PaLM 540B 24.9 44.7
Self-Ask (Press et al., 2022) InstructGPT 175B 36.8 55.2
IRCoT (Trivedi et al., 2022) Code-Davinci-002 175B - 60.7
D&Q LLaMA2 13B 39.0 59.6
Table 1: Results on HotPotQA dataset. EM: Exact Match.
The results indicate a significant enhancement in
the response capability of the Base model with the
D&Q approach. Even after complex prompt fine-
tuning and reinforcement learning for KwaiDialog,
our method still achieves victory in 37% of test
cases (not losing in 73%). Compared to ChatGPT,
D&Q maintains a competitive position, not losing
in 62% of cases.
win tie lose
D&Q vs KwaiDialog 37% 36% 27%
D&Q vs ChatGPT 24% 38% 38%
Table 2: Human evaluation on ChitChatQA
4.2 HotPotQA
4.2.1 Baselines
ReAct Utilizes Search and Lookup tools itera-
tively to provide external information for large lan-
guage models (Yao et al., 2022).
Self-Ask Requires the model to ask itself and use
the answers by the search engine to enhance the
model (Press et al., 2022).
IRCoT Decomposes questions through Chain-of-
Thought, retrieves results using a retriever, then
concatenates the question and reference context to
a more robust language model (GPT-3).
4.2.2 Implementation Details
We conducted experiments on the HotPotQA
dataset. Similar to most baseline models, our con-
figuration was question-only: providing only the
question without accompanying references, allow-
ing the model to autonomously invoke external
tools for information retrieval. We defined three
tools: [ArticleRetriever] for querying entries
in Wikipedia, [PageRetriever] for retrieving
pages corresponding to the entries, and [Finish]
representing task termination. The specific imple-
mentations of these tools were achieved through
calls to the MediaWiki* API. We utilized 200 train-
ing instances and performed supervised fine-tuning
in a multi-turn dialogue format on LLaMA2-13b.
4.2.3 Results
Table 1 shows the D&Q result of HotPotQA. We
can draw the following conclusions:
Backtracking enhances the model’s retrieval
capability. Although ReAct supports acquiring
reference information through observation, this ap-
proach is, in practice, greedy. Specifically, ReAct
does not explicitly backtrack but tends toward ran-
dom walks. In contrast, D&P stores intermediate
states, allowing it to retreat to the previous state
in case of retrieval failure, significantly enhancing
retrieval capability.
Tool invocation can compensate for parame-
ter limitations. In comparison to IRCoT’s GPT-
3 (175B), our generative model is LLaMA-13B.
Through supervised fine-tuning, D&Q can achieve
results comparable to IRCoT. This indicates that
smaller models, through supervised fine-tuning
to learn tool invocation, can achieve performance
comparable to larger models.
5 Ablation Study
5.1 Retrieval Ability
Method Average Contexts Recall
direct prompt 26.7 52.3
D&Q 50.0 68.8
Table 3: Recall of retrieval.
We limit the retriever’s calls to a maximum of
10, with each call returning up to 5 relevant en-
tries. Therefore, the model can return a maximum
*https://www.mediawiki.org/wiki/API:Search/

of 50 entries when generating responses. We cal-
culate the recall by retrieving 50 entries using the
initial question as a baseline. We tested the recall
of D&Q’s retrieval ability and compared it with
the baseline, resulting in an increase from 52.3%
to 68.8%. This indicates that considering context
contributes to more accurate tool invocation.
6 Conclusion
In conclusion, we propose the "Decompose-and-
Query" framework (D&Q) to address the suscepti-
bility of large language models to hallucinations by
guiding them to utilize external knowledge within
a constrained and reliable context. Through ex-
periments on the ChitChatQA dataset and the Hot-
PotQA question-only setting, D&Q demonstrated
competitive performance against existing models.
Our contributions include the introduction of the
ChitChatQA dataset, a novel framework for con-
strained problem decomposition, and the achieve-
ment of a notable F1 score on HotPotQA. These
findings underscore the potential of D&Q in en-
hancing the robustness and performance of large
language models in question-answering tasks.
