record_id: s2_snowball:d987b87fecfe6b1887987ae580b1b3c65a851932
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2604.03697
fetched_title: SGTA: Scene-Graph Based Multi-Modal Traffic Agent for Video Understanding
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:14Z

SGTA: Scene-Graph Based Multi-Modal Traffic
Agent for Video Understanding
Xingcheng Zhou1 , Mingyu Liu1 , Walter Zimmer1 , Jiajie Zhang1 , and
Alois Knoll1
Technical University of Munich, Chair of Robotics, Artificial Intelligence (AI) and
Embedded Systems, Boltzmannstraße 3, 85748 Garching bei München, Germany
xingcheng.zhou@tum.de,mingyu.liu@tum.de,walter.zimmer@tum.de,
jiajie.zhang@tum.de, knoll@in.tum.de
Abstract.We presentScene-Graph Based Multi-ModalTrafficAgent
(SGTA), a modular framework for traffic video understanding that com-
bines structured scene graphs with multi-modal reasoning. It constructs
a traffic scene graph from roadside videos using detection, tracking, and
lane extraction, followed by tool-based reasoning over both symbolic
graph queries and visual inputs. SGTA adopts ReAct to process inter-
leaved reasoning traces from large language models with tool invoca-
tions, enabling interpretable decision making for complex video ques-
tions. Experiments on selected TUMTraffic VideoQA dataset sample
demonstrate that SGTA achieves competitive accuracy across multiple
question types while providing transparent reasoning steps. These results
highlight the potential of integrating structured scene representations
with multi-modal agents for traffic video understanding.
Keywords:Traffic Video Understanding·Multi-Modal Agent·Traffic
Scene Graph.
1 Introduction
Understanding complex traffic scenes from roadside videos is essential for intel-
ligent transportation systems, traffic safety monitoring, and autonomous driv-
ing. Recent advances in large language models (LLMs), vision–language models
(VLMs), and multi-modal agent have enabled visual question answering on traf-
fic scenraios [1,2,3]. However, existing methods often lack interpretability and
struggle with fine-grained spatio-temporal reasoning, especially in traffic sce-
narios [3]. To address these limitations, we propose theScene-Graph Based
Multi-Modal Traffic Agent (SGTA)for traffic video understanding. SGTA
first constructs a traffic scene graph [4] that encodes spatio–temporal relations
among objects, lanes, and frames using detection, tracking, and map priors.
Based on this structured representation, SGTA employs a ReAct-style [5] rea-
soning framework that interleaves reasoning traces from an LLM with tool calls
over the scene graph and visual inputs. This design allows SGTA to decompose
complex queries into sequences of interpretable reasoning steps while integrating
both symbolic and visual information.
arXiv:2604.03697v1 [cs.CV] 4 Apr 2026

2 Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
2 Related Work
(a) Traffic digital twin approach.
(b) End-to-end traffic VQA models.
(c) Scene-graph based multi-modal traffic agent (ours).
Fig.1: Comparison of paradigms for traffic scene understanding.
2.1 Roadside Traffic Digital Twin
Roadside traffic digital twin is a digital representation of the traffic state that
mirrors the physical environment in real time. Building such a system normally
requires roadside sensing with cameras, lidars, and radars, calibration and syn-
chronization across sites, and multi-sensor fusion that outputs object position
within unified coordinate system. Networking and edge-cloud computing are in-
tegrated to satisfy bandwidth and latency requirements. As a pioneer system,
Providentia [6] demonstrated the feasibility of highway-scale traffic digital twins
on the A9 test field and later extended the concept to urban intersections us-
ing distributed architectures with multi-modal sensor fusion. The traffic digital
twin system is shown in Fig 1-(a). Autotech.agil project [7] provides modu-
lar, service-oriented architectures beyond vehicles to the entire traffic system to
enable scalable and updatable digital twin frameworks for cooperative mobility.
For roadside perception algorithms, BEVHeight [8] generates BEV features from
roadside images to construct 3D roadside detection, and WARM-3D [9] intro-
duces a semi-supervised domain adaptation framework to improve the real-world
3D roadside perception ability. Recent datasets such as TUMTraf series [10], and
DAIR-V2X [11] provide large-scale roadside data that benchmark the perception
ability of roadside traffic digital rwin systems.
2.2 Traffic Scene Understanding with Language Models
With the success of LLMs and VLMs, they have been increasingly adopted for
traffic scene understanding, aiming to interpret visual observations and answer
natural language queries in complex road environments. VLMs directly process
multi-modal inputs and provide end-to-end scene interpretation, as shown in Fig.
1-(b). Zhou [12] evaluates multi-modal foundation models on traffic event anal-
ysis, showing the ability to reason over complex traffic events. Other work [13]
automates scenario-level traffic categorization with large VLMs to reduce label-
ing costs in large datasets. TUMTraffic-VideoQA [14] establishes a benchmark
of roadside videos with QA pairs, captions, and grounding annotations. Besides,

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 3
LLM-based methods integrate visual tools to analyze traffic scenes. Compared
to end-to-end VLMs, LLM-based frameworks follow a modular and structured
paradigm. Yang [8] employs GPT-4o to coordinate smaller VLMs for highway
scene analysis, covering weather, pavement, and congestion. SeeUnsafe [15] in-
troduces a multimodal framework that converts traffic video into structured
accident assessments and supports interactive video QA. In this work, we adopt
the concept of scene graph as traffic representation for scene understanding and
reasoning, and introduce a multi-modal agent for structural reasoning based on
LLMs, as shown in Fig. 1-(c).
3 Methods
We present the proposed SGTA in this section. An overview is shown in Fig. 2.
Fig.2: Overview of Scene-graph based multi-modal traffic agent (ours).
3.1 Scene Graph Generation
We construct a traffic scene graphGfor each videoVas a structured spatio-
temporal representation of the dynamic scene. Formally,G= (N,E)consists of
nodesNand edgesEencoding spatio-temporal relations.
As shown in Fig. 2, the traffic scene graph consists of three types of nodes,
i.e., frame nodes, lane nodes, and instance nodes. Instance nodes are generated
by applying object detection, tracking, and re-identification, yielding robust 2D
representations of dynamic participants across video. Camera parameters and
external spatio priors are used to project 2D pixel coordinate detection into
3D road coordinates. Each instance node is enriched with attributes including
category, bounding box, and 3D position. Besides, instance velocity and heading
are further derived from temporal consistency and spatial relations. Similarly,
lane nodes are extracted from lane detection models and map priors, and provide
spatial references for instance driving maneuvers like lane changes. Frame nodes
act as temporal anchors, linking all entities that appear at a given time frame.
Edges are constructed based on spatio-temporal relations among nodes. Tem-
poral edges connect the same instance across consecutive frames, ensuring in-
stance trajectory continuity. Spatial edges encode pairwise relations such as dis-
tance, relative position, and lane assignment. Frame-to-instance edges register

4 Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
which participants are present in each frame, while instance-to-lane edges de-
scribe alignment with lanes to traffic participants. Together, these relations en-
ableGto capture both geometry and dynamics of traffic in a compact, queryable
structure. For storage and retrieval, we adopt a Neo4j graph database, which al-
lows efficient querying of node attributes and edge relations, and provides a
scalable backend for multi-modal reasoning.
Algorithm 1:Workflow of SGTA
Input:VideoV, QuestionQ, Large Language ModelL, Vision Language
ModelΦ, Tool SetU, Max StepsT
Output:Answerˆy, Trajectory{s t,a t,o t|1≤t≤T}wheres t,a t, ando t
denote context, tool choice, and observation respectively
1Stage 1 Traffic Scene Graph Construction
2Inputs:V, Object/Lane Detector, External Priors
3Outputs:Scene GraphGcapturing nodes and relations
4begin
5Create frame, object, and lane nodes from detections and tracking
6Project detections into road coordinates using external priors and assign
kinematic attributes to object nodes
7Construct edges inGencoding spatio-temporal relations
8Stage 2 Querying and Reasoning overGandV
9Inputs:Q,V,G,U,Φ
10s 1←initial context summarizingQand a compact view ofG
11fort= 1toTdo
12ˆy t←L⟨Q,s t⟩
13h t←L.plan⟨Q,s t,ˆyt⟩//h t is intermediate planning output ofL
14ifstop_signal⟨Q,s t,ˆyt⟩then
15a t←stop
16break
17select toolu t∈Uand inputx t viaπ ReAct⟨st,Q,h t,G⟩
18a t←⟨u t,x t⟩
19o t←u t⟨xt⟩// queryGor analyze frames withΦ
20s t+1←s t∪o t
21returnˆy t and the trajectory{s t,a t,o t|1≤t≤T}
3.2 Tool Set of SGTA
The tool setUprovides the interface between the language model and the traffic
video together with its structured scene graphG. We group the tools into two
categories according to their target modality.
Scene Graph Tools.These tools are based on Cypher queries executed over
the structured scene graphG. Each tool call is mapped into an action written in
Cypher, which retrieves or aggregates node and edge attributes. Single-instance
tools access properties of one node, for exampleQueryObjectsAtFramelists ob-
jectsandattributes,MotionAtFramereturnsvelocityandheading,CountObjects
computes per-class counts,TimeWindowreports the lifespan of a track, and
TrajectorySummarysamples positions across frames. Multi-instance tools cap-

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 5
Tool Class Main input Main output
ParseInstancesSingle SG instance-tuple instance f-ID, t-ID
QueryObjectsAtFrameSingle SG f-ID, (class) bbox, speed, pos3d
MotionAtFrameSingle SG f-ID, t-ID speed, heading, vel3d
CountObjectsSingle SG f-ID, (class) count
TimeWindowSingle SG t-ID start, end, duration, fps
TrajectorySummarySingle SG t-ID instance center list
ListAllTracksMulti SG video ID, (class) all t-IDs
RelativePositionMulti SG f-ID, t-ID a, t-ID b relation,dx,dy, distance
CropImageVisual Tools f-ID, t-IDs cropped image regions
Visual QAVisual Tools image, question answer
Table 1: Summary of SGTA tool sets. Single- and Multi- correspond to tools
with single/multi-node queries. (.) means optional, v-ID, f-ID, and t-ID denote
video ID, frame ID, and instance tracking ID, respectively.
ture relations or dataset-level statistics, such asListAllTracksto enumerate
all participants in a video andRelativePositionto compute pairwise spatio
relations. By formalizing all queries as Cypher expressions, these tools enable
the agent to traverse the scene graph and reason efficiently over temporal and
relational structures.
Visual Tools.In addition to the scene graph queries, visual tools directly
invoke the VLMΦon specified visual regions. They complement the symbolic
graph by grounding reasoning in appearance cues, descriptive analysis, and
queries beyond structured attributes.CropImageextracts image regions corre-
sponding to selected track IDs and frame IDs, whileVisual QAanswers visual
questions on given visual inputs.
3.3 Multi-Modal Reasoning
SGTA performs reasoning over the traffic scene graphGand the raw video
through reasoning process following the ReAct framework [5]. The key idea is
to interleave reasoning (thought) with acting (tool usage) in order to iteratively
refine context and reach a grounded answer.
At each stept, LLMLproduces a reasoning traceh t (“Thought”), which
records its current interpretation of the question and the available contextst.
Based on(Q,s t,h t), a policyπ ReAct selects an actiona t =⟨u t,x t⟩, whereu t
is one of the predefined tools inUandx t is the textual input. The action
is executed either as a Cypher query overG(e.g.,query_objects_at_frame,
relative_position) or as a visual interface to the VLMΦ(e.g.,CropImage,
Visual QA). The tool returns an observationot that is appended to the context,
yieldings t+1 =s t∪o t. The process continues untilLemits a stop signal, at
which point the final answerˆyis generated together with the complete trajec-
tory{s t,a t,o t|1≤t≤T}. This design allows the agent to decompose complex
video-based traffic questions into a sequence of interpretable reasoning steps,
where each step is explicitly linked to a tool invocation and its result.

6 Authors Suppressed Due to Excessive Length
4 Experiments
4.1 Datasets and Implementation
Dataset.We evaluate SGTA on the TUMTraffic VideoQA dataset [14], which
contains real-world traffic accident videos paired with QA annotations. We se-
lect a representative sample video together with its associated VQA example to
evaluate the performance of SGTA.
Implementation.SGTA employs GPT-4o-mini [16] for both LLM and VLM
components. YOLOv11 [17] and RT-DETR [18] serve as detection backbones,
and ByteTrack performs multi-object tracking. We adopt the multi-scale trick to
improve the recall of small instances. Lane detection is performed with YOLOP
lane detector [19], skeletonized into polylines and projected to road coordinates
via calibrated camera parameters. Instances adopt default 3D size priors and are
projected by inverse mapping under the ground-plane constraint.
4.2 Quantitative and Qualitative Evaluation
Table 2 summarizes SGTA performance on the selected video QAs across five
question types under H0, H1, and overall settings. SGTA attains 55% accuracy
on H0, 53% on H1, and 54% overall. Existence and class questions achieve the
highest accuracy (59% and 64%), while positioning remains the most challenging
(36%). These results indicate that SGTA handles object-level reasoning well
but struggles with fine-grained spatio-temporal relations. We show a qualitative
example for better illustration on the right side of Fig. 2.
Type H0 Num. H0 Acc H1 Num. H1 Acc All Num. Avg. Acc
Class 4/7 0.57 5/7 0.71 9/14 0.64
Motion 3/7 0.43 4/7 0.57 7/14 0.50
Positioning 3/7 0.43 2/7 0.29 5/14 0.36
Existence 4/6 0.67 6/11 0.55 10/17 0.59
Counting 4/6 0.67 9/17 0.53 13/23 0.57
Average 18/33 0.55 26/49 0.53 44/82 0.54
Table 2: Performance of QA across H0, H1, and overall accuracy
5 Conclusion and Future Work
In this work, we introduced SGTA, a scene-graph based multi-modal traffic agent
that integrates structured scene representations for interpretable traffic video
understanding. SGTA constructs a traffic scene graph from roadside videos, em-
ploys tool-based reasoning over both symbolic queries and visual inputs, and
achieves competitive performance across diverse question types on the TUM-
Traffic VideoQA dataset. Future work includes extending SGTA in three direc-
tions. First, we can scale SGTA to larger and more diverse traffic datasets with
real-time constraints. Second, we will explore integrating trajectory forecasting
and risk assessment into the reasoning process for safety-critical applications.
Third, combining SGTA with multi-agent communication frameworks to enable
collaborative reasoning across multiple intersections and cameras.

Title Suppressed Due to Excessive Length 7
Acknowledgments.This work was supported by the project VIDETEC-2
(Grant No.01F2232E) and the Federal Ministry for Digital and Transport of
Germany (BMDV).
