record_id: s2_snowball:4721b71c114e9b2f12dd5f4bfb5fae4a3ca5e5ef
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2505.12476
fetched_title: Enhancing Large Language Models with Reward-guided Tree Search for Knowledge Graph Question and Answering
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:39Z

arXiv:2505.12476v1 [cs.CL] 18 May 2025
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 1
Enhancing Large Language Models with
Reward-guided Tree Search for Knowledge Graph
Question and Answering
Xiao Long, Liansheng Zhuang, Member, IEEE , Chen Shen, Shaotian Yan, Yifei Li, Shafei Wang
Abstract—Recently, large language models (LLMs) have
demonstrated impressive performance in Knowledge Graph
Question Answering (KGQA) tasks, which aim to find answers
based on knowledge graphs (KGs) for natural language questions.
Existing LLMs-based KGQA methods typically follow the Graph
Retrieval-Augmented Generation (GraphRAG) paradigm, which
first retrieves reasoning paths from the large KGs, and then
generates the answers based on them. However, these methods
emphasize the exploration of new optimal reasoning paths in
KGs while ignoring the exploitation of historical reasoning paths,
which may lead to sub-optimal reasoning paths. Additionally,
the complex semantics contained in questions may lead to
the retrieval of inaccurate reasoning paths. To address these
issues, this paper proposes a novel and training-free framework
for KGQA tasks called Reward-guided Tree Search on Graph
(RTSoG). RTSoG decomposes an original question into a series
of simpler and well-defined sub-questions to handle the complex
semantics. Then, a Self-Critic Monte Carlo Tree Search (SC-
MCTS) guided by a reward model is introduced to iteratively
retrieve weighted reasoning paths as contextual knowledge.
Finally, it stacks the weighted reasoning paths according to their
weights to generate the final answers. Extensive experiments on
four datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of RTSoG. Notably,
it achieves 8.7% and 7.0% performance improvement over
the state-of-the-art method on the GrailQA and the WebQSP
respectively.
Index Terms —Knowledge graph question and answering
(KGQA), graph retrieval-augmented generation, large language
models.
I. I NTRODUCTION
Knowledge Graph Question Answering (KGQA) has drawn
much attention in recent years. It aims to find answers for nat-
ural language questions based on the knowledge graphs (KGs),
such as Freebase [1], Wikidata [2], and DBpedia [3], which
are built from numerous triplets consisting of (head entity,
relation, tail entity). Since natural language questions often
contain compositional semantics [4], accurately understanding
the semantic information in the questions and identifying the
structured knowledge in KGs is very important for KGQA
tasks.
Recently, as large language models (LLMs) [5]–[7] have
demonstrated significant progress in solving various complex
NLP tasks [8], [9], some works begin to exploit the potential of
Xiao Long, Liansheng Zhuang, and Yifei Li are with the School of
Cyberspace Science and Technology, University of Science and Tech-
nology of China (USTC), Hefei, Anhui 230026, China (e-mail: longx-
iao1997@mail.ustc.edu.cn; lszhuang@ustc.edu.cn).
Chen Shen and Shaotian Yan are independent researchers.
Shafei Wang is with the Peng Cheng Laboratory, Shenzhen 518066, China.
LLMs in solving the task of knowledge graph question answer-
ing [10], [11]. Typically, existing LLM-based methods [12],
[13] follow the paradigm of Graph Retrieval-Augmented Gen-
eration (GraphRAG) [14], which consists of the Graph-guided
retrieval stage and the Graph-enhanced generation stage. In the
first stage, they retrieve reasoning paths in KGs by different
search strategies. In the second stage, they utilize the retrieved
reasoning paths as contextual knowledge for LLMs to generate
the answers to the questions. Under this paradigm, LLMs are
often training-free and the quality of retrieval reasoning paths
plays a key role in the final performance. Various methods are
different in the search strategies as shown in Table I. Benefiting
from the great reasoning abilities of LLMs, GraphRAG-like
methods have shown impressive performance in the task of
knowledge graph question answering.
TABLE I
COMPARISON OF DIFFERENT METHODS IN GRAPH -GUIDED RETRIEVAL
METHODS .
Algorithms Graph-guided retrieval methods
ToG [13] Beam search
ToT [10] Greedy search
PoG [12] Best-of-N
ToG2.0 [11] Beam search
RTSoG SC-MCTS
However, existing LLM-based KGQA methods still suffer
from the following issues. Firstly, in the graph-guided retrieval
stage, most existing methods emphasize the exploration of new
optimal reasoning paths in KGs while ignoring the exploitation
of existing reasoning paths. This may lead to finding sub-
optimal reasoning paths. Secondly, existing methods often use
the original question to guide the retrieval. Since the questions
often contain compositional semantics [4], this may lead to
retrieving inaccurate reasoning paths from KGs. Finally, in
the graph-enhanced generation stage, existing methods usu-
ally treat the different retrieval reasoning paths equally to
reason the answer, ignoring the differences in retrieved rea-
soning paths. These issues significantly limit the performance
of Large Language Models under the existing GraphRAG
paradigm.
Inspired by the above insights, this paper proposes a novel
framework named Reward-guided Tree Search on Graph (RT-
SoG) for KGQA tasks. Its core idea is to use the Monte Carlo
Tree Search (MCTS) to better balance the exploration and ex-
ploitation of reasoning paths in KGs. Specifically, the proposed

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 2
RTSoG consists of three stages: Question Decomposition,
Weighted Reasoning Paths Retrieval and Answer Generation.
In the question decomposition stage, it leverages LLMs to
decompose a complex question into a series of simpler and
more clearly defined sub-questions, which along with the
original question, serve as guidance for the subsequent stages.
Next, it iteratively performs the Self-Critic Monte Carlo Tree
Search (SC-MCTS) on the KGs to retrieve weighted reasoning
paths that support the inference of the question. The self-
critic mechanism provides timely termination signals during
the iteration, which can avoid unnecessary exploration. Finally,
to consider the differences brought by reasoning paths with
varying weights, we propose a reasoning path stack to assist
in generating the final answer. To summarize, our contributions
are as follows:
• A novel Reward-guided Tree Search on Graph (RTSoG)
is proposed for KGQA tasks. It extracts more accurate
contextual knowledge from KGs via a variant of MCTS
to enhance the reasoning capabilities of LLMs, and
thus achieves SOTA performance against existing KGQA
methods.
• A Self-Critic Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) guided
by a reward model is introduced to retrieve the weighted
reasoning paths in KGs as exact contextual knowledge
for LLMs to answer the questions. The Self-Critic mech-
anism can significantly enhance both efficiency and per-
formance in identifying optimal reasoning paths.
• Extensive experiments on four benchmark datasets
demonstrate that RTSoG achieves superior performances
in KGQA tasks. Notably, RTSoG achieves 8.7% and 7.0%
improvement over all types of state-of-the-art methods on
the GrailQA and the WebQSP respectively.
II. R ELATED WROK
In this section, we introduce existing knowledge graph
question and answering methods and large language model
reasoning methods, then we explain their relation to our work.
Knowledge Graph Question and Answering. Knowledge
graph question answering aims to find answer entities that
are multiple hops away from the topic entities in a large-
scale KG. There are two mainstream approaches to solve the
KGQA task: Semantic parsing-based methods and Informa-
tion retrieval-based methods. Semantic parsing-based methods
focus on translating questions into logical forms executable
against KGs, such as SPARQL, query graph, and S-expression.
Some early methods rely on pre-defined question templates to
synthesize queries [15], which requires strong domain knowl-
edge. Recent methods like StructGPT [16] utilize strategies
of step-wise query graph generation and search for semantic
parsing. Alternatively, other SP-based methods, like RnG-
KBQA [17] and ArcaneQA [18] employ sequence-to-sequence
models to generate S-expressions completely and offer various
enhancements to the semantic parsing process. Some other
works [19], [20] use the FOL queries to help the parsing
process. However, this type of method needs ground-truth
executable queries as supervision (which are costly to obtain)
and their performance is limited when the KG has missing
links (non-executable queries).
Information retrieval-based methods for KGQA retrieve
reasoning paths [21], which are used as input during KGQA
reasoning. The earlier IR methods [22] use neural networks to
directly score candidate answers and determine an answer set
based on a score threshold. Subsequently, some works utilize
Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for information propagation
and score the results accordingly [23]. They also called Graph-
based retrieval methods [24]. Recently, to integrate Large Lan-
guage Models(LLMs) for KGQA, retrieval-augmented meth-
ods leverage LLMs to retrieve the relative facts from the
KGs to improve the reasoning performance [12], [13], [25],
[26]. UniKGQA [27] unifies the graph retrieval and reasoning
process into a single model with LLMs. ToG [13] uses LLMs
to iteratively execute beam search on the KGs, discovers the
most promising reasoning paths, and returns the most likely
reasoning results. PoG [12] utilizes LLMs to perform adaptive
planning on Knowledge Graphs, which can be regarded as
a Best-of-N (BoN) search on the KGs. ToT [10] leverages
LLMs to iteratively execute a greedy search on the KGs and
then generate the answers. However, these methods emphasize
the exploration of new optimal reasoning paths in KGs while
ignoring the exploitation of existing reasoning paths. This may
lead to finding sub-optimal reasoning paths.
Large Language Model Reasoning. LLMs have shown
significant advantages in semantic understanding, genera-
tion, and reasoning. Previous studies, such as Chain-of-
thoughts(CoT) [8] imitates the thought process of humans
to provide step-by-step solutions given a question. Self-
Consistency CoT [28] improves the reliability and Self-
Consistency of answers by sampling multiple interpretations
from LM and then selecting the final answer that appears most
frequently. Tree-of-Thoughts (ToT) [29] further generalizes the
CoT methodology by considering multiple different reasoning
paths in the tree and exploring coherent units of thought
to execute thoughtful decision-making. And ReAct [30] in-
troduces a prompt-based agent that uses the large language
model to interact with the environment. Alternatively, other
studies which on top of LLMs has recently attracted significant
attention. They have explored search algorithms to improve
the performance of LLMs during the inference stage [31]–
[33]. Many studies have proven that scaling the inference-
time computation can lead to substantial improvements in
the performance of LLMs without training [34]–[36], which
sampling diverse reasoning paths can significantly enhance
the probability of finding the correct answers. Meanwhile,
these search algorithms, where multiple branches of outcomes
are explored during the search, have been widely applied in
reinforcement learning algorithms [37] and many real-world
applications, such as AlphaGo [38] and MuZero [39] for
their good exploration-exploitation trade-off. However, current
enhancing LLMs with search approaches mainly rely on the
internal knowledge of LLMs to search potential solutions,
which will encounter the issues of hallucination and out-
of-date knowledge in large language models and lead to a
decline in model performance. In this paper, we leverage the
knowledge retrieved from the more reliable knowledge graphs
to enhance the faithful reasoning ability of the large language
model.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 3
Fig. 1. Overview of the proposed training-free RTSoG framework, which contains the three stages: Question Decomposition, Weighted Reasoning Paths
Retrieval and Answer Generation.
III. P RELIMINARY
Knowledge Graph (KG) stores massive factual knowledge
in the form of a set of triplets: G ={(e,r,e′)|e,e′∈E,r ∈
R}, where E and R denote the set of entities and relations,
respectively.
Knowledge Graph Question Answering (KGQA) is a
typical reasoning task based on KGs. Given a natural language
questionq and the KGG, the task aims to design a function f
to predict answer entities ea∈ Aq based on knowledge from
G, i.e., ea =f (q,G). Following previous works [23], [27], we
assume the topic entities et∈ Tq mentioned in the question
q and answer entities ea∈ Aq are labeled and linked to the
corresponding entities in knowledge graphG, i.e., Tq, Aq⊆E .
Realation Paths are a sequence of relations: z =
{r1,r 2,...,r l}, where ri ∈ R denotes the i-th relation in
the path and l denotes the length of the path.
Reasoning Paths are the instances of a relation path z from
a topic entity to target entity in the KG, e.g., the reasoning
path Pzl from e0∈ Tq to el: Pzl =e0
r1
−→e1
r2
−→...
rl
−→el
where ei∈ E denotes the i-th entity and ri denotes the i-th
relation in the relation paths zl.
IV. M ETHODOLOGY
In this section, we introduce the technical details of the
novel RTSoG framework for KGQA tasks. As illustrated in
Fig 1, RTSoG consists of three stages: Question Decomposi-
tion, Weighted Reasoning Paths Retrieval and Answer Gener-
ation. It should be noted that the based LLM used in the three
stages is training-free and called the policy model πθ. Firstly,
RTSoG utilizes the policy modelπθ to decompose the original
question into a series of simpler sub-questions, which serve
as guidance for the subsequent stages. In the second stage,
RTSoG utilizes the policy modelπθ to iteratively perform SC-
MCTS on the KG to explore reasoning paths guided by the
reward model Vθ, which is the same large language model
with the policy model. Then, we can obtain a reasoning tree
T . In the next step, we filter the top K paths with higher Q
values from the reasoning tree as weighted reasoning paths that
support the inference of the question. Finally, we consider the
differences brought by paths with different weights. Paths are
pushed into the reasoning path stack S in descending order
of their weights for final reasoning path determination. The
higher-weight valid paths that enter the stack earlier serve
as historical information to assist in judging subsequently
pushed paths. Consequently, the remaining paths in the stack
represent all correct historical paths, which the policy model
πθ ultimately uses as the basis for generating the final answer.
Next, we provide a detailed description of the three stages in
RTSoG.
A. Question Decomposition
To reduce the difficulty of understanding the semantics of
the original question and enable more accurate retrieval of
reasoning paths, RTSoG leverages the policy model πθ to
decompose the original question into a series of simpler and
more precise sub-questions in the first stage. Specifically, we
prompt the large language model to utilize both the question
and its associated topic entities e0 to break down the original
questionq into a set of sub-questions. These sub-questions, de-
noted assubq ={subq1,subq 2,··· ,subqn}, are subsequently

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 4
used for guiding knowledge exploration on the KG via SC-
MCTS. It should be noted that the LLM performing question
decomposition is also training-free.
{subqi}n
i=1 =πθ(q,e 0). (1)
The decomposed sub-questions {subqi}n
i=1 generally analyze
the problem from different perspectives, which can better
guide the subsequent stages: retrieval of weighted reasoning
paths and the generation of answers.
B. Weighted Reasoning Paths Retrieval
In this stage, we first construct a reasoning tree T in the
knowledge graphG and then filter the high-weighted reasoning
paths related to the question q. To achieve this, we propose
a Self-Critic Monte Carlo Tree Search (SC-MCTS). As illus-
trated in Fig 1, the SC-MCTS method combines the Monte
Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) with the Self-Critic mechanism. It
divides each iteration into four steps: node selection, expansion
with self-critic, evaluation and backpropagation. Next, we
will describe each step in detail and highlight the differences
between SC-MCTS and traditional MCTS on the graph.
Node Selection. SC-MCTS builds a reasoning treeT based
on the same training-free LLM: policy model πθ and value
model Vθ. Each node si = [ei,PziN (si),Q (si)] represents a
state comprising the entity ei in KG, its historical reasoning
path Pzi is from the topic entity e0∈ Tq to current entity ei
connected by the corresponding relations, the number of visits
N (si), andQ(si), which denotes the reward value for inferring
the answers to the question and its sub-questions based on
the node’s historical reasoning path Pzi. At each iteration, the
algorithm first selects an appropriate node from the current tree
for subsequent exploration and expansion. Specifically, starting
from the root node s0 (which always corresponds to the topic
entity e0), it traverses the tree by selecting a child node at
each level until reaching a leaf node. A leaf node is defined
when either of the following conditions is met: (1) reaching
the maximum tree depth or (2) receiving an End of Search
(EoS) signal. To balance the exploration and exploitation, we
employ the well-known Upper Confidence Bounds applied to
Trees (UCT) [40] for node selection:
UCT (si) = Q(si)
N (si) +c·
s
lnN (p)
N (si) , (2)
Here,Q(si) is the reward value for inferring the answers to the
question and its sub-questions based on the node’s historical
reasoning path Pzi by value model. The N (si) in equation 2
represents the number of visits to node si, p is the parent
node of si, and c is the exploration weight. The node with the
highest UCT value is selected for subsequent steps.
Expansion with self-critic. After selecting the current node
si, RTSoG utilizes the policy model πθ to incorporate the
corresponding reasoning path Pzi as historical reasoning in-
formation. It then samples k most relevant entities for solving
both the main question and its sub-questions from the knowl-
edge graph G and subsequently expands the search tree by
adding these entities as new nodes. The equation 3 describes
this process, and it involves two phases: relation exploration
and entity exploration. We provide detailed explanations in
subsequent sections.
sj =Get child(subq,si,G,πθ). (3)
(1) Relation Exploration. Relation exploration is a pro-
cess to retrieve all adjacent relations Rei
adj of the entity
ei corresponding to the current node si, and filter out the
relations most relevant to the question q and sub-questions
subq. As equation 4, we first conduct the predefined relation
search to obtain all relations in the known KG G linked to
the selected entity ei as the candidate relation set Rei
adj =
{rei
adj,1,rei
adj,1,··· ,rei
adj,N}, where N is the total number of
adjacent relations. RTSoG then employs the value model Vθ
to perform adjacent relation filtering: based on the semantic
information of sub-questions, topic entity information, and
current historical reasoning path, it dynamically selects a
variable number b of relevant adjacent relations Rei
filt =
{rei
filt, 1,··· ,rei
filt,b} from Rei
adj, and assigns reward scores
Sr
filt = {sr
filt, 1,··· ,sr
filt,b} that reflect their likelihood of
solving the sub-questions. These filtered relations and their
reward will serve as known information to assist in subsequent
entity exploration and determine the entities to be expanded
on the tree.
Rei
adj =Get adj relations(si,G), (4)
Rei
filt,Sr
filt =Vθ(si,Rei
adj,G). (5)
(2) Entity Exploration. Due to the multiple semantics of rela-
tions [41]–[43] in the knowledge graph (KG), there are multi-
ple tail entities given a known head entity and the filtered re-
lations. Therefore, we should filter the most reasoning-related
entities as the final expanded nodes for every b relation. Given
the entityei corresponding to the current nodesi and a filtered
relationrei
filt,l inRei
filt , the model performs a predefined query
operation on the KG to obtain the set of all candidate tail
entities Eei,rf ilt,l
cand ={eei,rf ilt,l
cand,1 ,··· ,eei,rf ilt,l
cand,M} in equation 6,
where M is the total number of adjacent entities. Then, we
use the entity eei,rf ilt,l
cand,j in Eei,rf ilt,l
cand as candidate entities and
combine them with their preceding relations to extend the
current reasoning path, forming the candidate reasoning paths
Pcand ={Pcand,j}M
j=1 where Pcand,j = Pei
r
ei
f ilt,l
−→ eei,rf ilt,l
cand,j .
Next, in equation 7, we prompt the value model Vθ to evaluate
each candidate historical reasoning path to obtain the reward,
determining the likelihood of successfully inferring the sub-
questions through that reasoning path.
Eei,rf ilt,l
cand =Get tail entities(si,rei
filt,l,G), (6)
SP
cand =Vθ(subq,e 0,Pcand), (7)
where SP
cand ={sP
cand,j}M
j=1. We select the index of highest
reward candidate reasoning path jmax = arg max j(sP
cand,j)
and extend its corresponding entity eei,rf ilt,l
cand,jmax
and their pre-
ceding relation rei
filt,l as new child node ei+l of the ei on the
tree for the next iterative exploration. For every relation that
passes the filtering process, the highest-reward entity is chosen
as the final node for expansion.
Finally, unlike traditional MCTS, which proceeds to the
rollout phase immediately after node expansion, SC-MCTS

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 5
performs instant evaluation right after expanding child nodes.
Although the value model can assess historical reasoning
paths, it cannot generate a signal to terminate node expan-
sion. Specifically, even after reaching a correct node, the
algorithm may continue exploring further beneath it, leading
to reduced search efficiency and the generation of incorrect
reasoning paths. To address this issue, we propose a self-critic
mechanism to provide timely termination signals, thereby
avoiding unnecessary exploration and guiding deeper search.
In practice, after each node expansion, we prompt the policy
model πθ to generate an End-of-Search (EoS) signal based
on whether the currently expanded historical reasoning path
SP
cand,jmax can infer the answer to the question in equation 8.
If an EoS signal is received, the node is set as a leaf node and
will not be expanded in subsequent iterations.
EoS (sj) = πθ(subq,sj). (8)
Evaluation. Traditional MCTS methods require performing
lots of rollouts from the current node until the task ends to
evaluate the expanded nodes. While in our work, we use the
LLM as the value modelVθ [44] to evaluate the current node. It
assigns an estimated reward to the expanded node ei+l, which
effectively quantifies the effectiveness of the policy model
πθ in successfully answering the input question based on the
historical reasoning path of the current node. The evaluation
involves two parts: local expansion relation assessment Sr
filt
and global historical reasoning path assessmentSP
cand, as men-
tioned in the relation exploration and entity exploration above.
The total reward value of ei+l is a weighted combination of
global and local reward in equation 9, where α controls the
relative influence of each part.
Qsi+l =αsr
filt,l + (1−α)sP
cand,l. (9)
Backpropagation. After obtaining the final reward for the
newly expanded node, we conduct value backpropagation
starting from the new node si+l. The value of every parent
node of si+l is updated using a weighted average method. For
every node C on the trace from root to si+l, we update its
NC and QC as follows:
N (C)←N (C) + 1, (10)
and
Q(C)←
P
inCi·vCiP
inCi
, (11)
whereCi(i = 1, 2,··· ,k ) are the children of C. This actually
updates the value of C according to its children’s value
expectation.
We iteratively repeat the above four steps to explore new
entities and their relations in KGs as new nodes in the
reasoning tree, completing H rounds of iterations to obtain
the final reasoning treeT , where H is a hyper-parameter, and
we will analyze it in experiments. Finally, we select the Top-
K nodes{erng,i}K
i=1 with higher reward value Q from the
reasoning tree and use their corresponding historical reasoning
paths{Prng,i}K
i=1 as weighted reasoning paths that support to
generate the final answer in the final stage.
{Prng,i}K
i=1 =Get weighted reasoning paths(Tq) (12)
ea =πθ(S,q,subq ) (13)
C. Answer Generation
In the final stage, we utilize the filtered K weighted reason-
ing paths {Prng,i}K
i=1 as the final information for generating
the answer to the question. It is important to note that,
unlike existing methods that directly generate answers based
on retrieved relevant information, we consider the varying
impacts of different weighted paths during reasoning in this
stage. Specifically, we sort the K weighted reasoning paths in
descending order of their weights and introduce the reasoning
path stackS. Each time, the reasoning path with the highest
weight is pushed into the stack, and the policy model πθ
is prompted to determine whether this path can derive the
answer to the original question or its sub-questions. If the
output is affirmative, the path is stored in the stack as known
reasoning information to assist in the judgment of subsequent
weighted reasoning paths. Finally, as equation 13, RTSoG uses
the policy model πθ to generate the final answer ea based on
the path remaining in the stack. The pseudocode of the RTSoG
is shown in Algorithm 1.
Algorithm 1 The proposed reward-guided tree search algo-
rithm RTSoG.
1: Input: KGG, question q, topic entity e0, iterations H,
width of tree b, the number of subquestions n, the number
of paths in S, policy model πθ, value model Vθ.
2: subq ={subqi}n
i=1←πθ(q,e 0).
3:Tq← Initialize tree(s0)
4: forh in range(H) do
5: s← root(Tq)
6: Node Selection
7: while s is not leaf node do
8: s← argmaxs′∈children(s)(Q(s
′
)
N (s′ ) +c·
q
lnN (s)
N (s′ ) ),
9: end while
10: Expansion with Self-Critic
11: forj in range(b) do
12: sj← Get child(subq,s,G,πθ) // Node expansion
13: EoS (sj)← πθ(subq,sj) // Self Critic
14: Evaluation
15: Q(sj)←Vθ(subq,sj,G)
16: end for
17: V alue Backpropagation
18: Back propagate(s) // Update value of all nodes
19: end for // Reasoning tree construction
20:{Prng,i}K
i=1 = Get weighted reasoning paths(Tq)
21:{Prng,m}K
m=1 = Sorted({Prng,i}K
i=1)
22: Reasoning path stackS← [ ]
23: form in range(K) do
24: if πθ(S,q,subq,P rng,m) then
25: S← Prng,m
26: end if
27: end for
28: ea =πθ(S,q,subq ) // Answer generation
29: Return ea
30: Output: ea

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 6
V. E XPERIMENTS
In this section, we comprehensively evaluate RTSoG by
answering the following evaluation questions (EQs):
• EQ1 (Main results). Does RTSoG outperform other
KBQA methods?
• EQ2 (Sensitivity analysis). How sensitive is the model
accuracy of RTSoG to the hyperparameters?
• EQ3 (Ablation study). How does each of the proposed
strategies in RTSoG contributes to the model accuracy?
• EQ4 (Efficiency analysis). How does the RTSoG com-
pare in efficiency to existing methods when inferring
questions?
• EQ5 (Case study). How does the RTSoG can find the
reasoning paths to get the final answer?
A. Experimental Setups
Datasets. To demonstrate the effectiveness of RTSoG on
knowledge graphs question answering, we adopt three rep-
resentative multi-hop KGQA datasets: ComplexWebQues-
tions [45], WebQSP [46], GrailQA [47] and WebQues-
tions [48]. The statistics of datasets are shown in Table II.
WebQuestions is an open-domain QA dataset based on Free-
base. WebQSP contains questions from WebQuestions that are
answerable by Freebase. It tests I.I.D. generalization on ques-
tions. ComplexWebQuestions (CWQ) extends WebQSP and
encompasses four types of complex questions: conjunction,
composition, comparative, and superlative. GrailQA is a di-
verse KGQA dataset built on Freebase, and is designed to test
three levels of generalization of models: I.I.D., compositional,
and zero-shot. All four datasets rely on the external knowledge
graph from Freebase [1]. For the large dataset GrailQA and
WebQuestions we utilize the same testing samples as those in
previous works [12], [13] to improve computational efficiency.
TABLE II
THE STATISTICS OF THE DATASETS USED IN THIS PAPER . * DENOTES WE
RANDOMLY SELECTED 1,000 SAMPLES FROM THE GRAIL QA AND 1500
SAMPLES FROM WEBQUESTIONS TEST SET AS PREVIOUS WORKS .
Dataset Answer Format Train Test
ComplexWebQuestions Entity 27,734 3,531
WebQSP Entity/Number 3,098 1,639
GrailQA∗ Entity/Number 44,337 1,000
WebQuestions∗ Entity/Number 3,778 1,500
Evaluation Metrics. Following prior research [49], [50], we
use exact match accuracy (EM) as the evaluation metric for
all datasets.
Baselines. Due to variations in the performance of the
method across different datasets, we select prior state-of-the-
art (SOTA) approaches as baselines for each dataset. They can
be categorized into three groups:
(1) LLM-only methods, including Qwen2.5-14B [7], a pow-
erful, open-source, large-scale language model (LLM) that
has been pre-trained on a diverse range of tasks. Llama-3.1-
8B [51], is the updated version of Llama-2 with more powerful
reasoning capabilities. ChatGPT [6], is a powerful closed-
source LLM that could follow instructions to conduct complex
tasks. GPT4 [52], is the new flagship model of OpenAI that
could reason across different modalities and tasks. And GPT-
4o-mini [5] is the mini-version of GPT-4o that could reason
across different modalities and tasks. For LLM-Only Methods,
we use chain-of-thought reasoning method [8] that prompts
LLMs to generate a chain of reasoning steps and the final
answers.
(2) Graph-based retrieval methods, including GraftNet [53],
a method retrieves relevant subgraphs from KGs with entity
linking. PullNet [23] trains a retrieval model composed of a
LSTM and a graph neural network to retrieve a question-
specific subgraph. NSM [22] and SR+NSM [21] propose
a relation-path retrieval to retrieve subgraphs for multi-hop
reasoning. EPR [54] proposes an evidence pattern retrieval
method to enhance retrieval-based methods in KGQA.
(3) LLM-based retrieval methods, including fine-tuned and
prompting methods. Fine-tuned methods: UniKGQA [27] uni-
fies the graph retrieval and reasoning process into a single
model with LLMs. DeCAF [55] combines semantic parsing
and LLMs reasoning to jointly generate answers, which also
reach salient performance on KGQA tasks. RoG [25] proposes
a planning-retrieval-reasoning framework that retrieves reason-
ing paths from KGs to guide LLMs in conducting faithful
reasoning. GNN-RAG [24] adopts a lightweight graph neural
network to effectively retrieve from KGs. RnG-KBQA [17]
first uses BERT to rank a set of enumerated candidate pro-
grams (up to a limited complexity), and then uses T5 to edit
the top programs into more complex programs. TIARA [56]
first uses BERT to retrieve a set of schema items, which
are further used as the input, together with the question,
to T5 for plan generation. They also apply constrained de-
coding but only for grammatically. FC-KBQA [57] proposes
a fine-to-coarse composition framework to avoid knowledge
entanglement and guarantee both generalization ability and
logical interpretability. FlexKBQA [58] is a flexible KGQA
framework with LLMs. It can utilize a limited set of an-
notated data to build KGQA for different KGs and query
languages. GAIN [59] pays attention to the robustness of
KGQA models. It proposes a data augmentation method to
alleviate this problem and further evaluates the distribution
shifts including from different aspects. Prompting methods:
StructGPT [16] defines the interface of KG data to imple-
ment knowledge access and filtering with finite quantity, and
leverage the LLM to infer the answer or subsequent planning
repeatedly. Interactive KBQA [60] interacts with KGs directly
and then generates logical forms. The interactions are under
three designed universal APIs for KGs. ToG [13] iteratively
retrieves relevant triplets from KGs and employs the LLM
to assess whether the reasoning paths in beam search are
sufficient for answering the question. PoG [12] proposes a
self-correcting adaptive planning paradigm for KG-augmented
LLM, which effectively augmenting LLM’s reasoning ability
and efficiency. ToG2.0 [11] is a hybrid RAG framework that
iteratively retrieves information from both unstructured and
structured knowledge sources in a tight-coupling manner. KB-
BINDER [61] is developed to challenge the heterogeneity
of items from different KGs. It enables few-shot in-context
learning over KGQA tasks.

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 7
Implementation Details. We try four LLMs as the policy
model in experiments: ChatGPT, GPT-4o-mini, GPT-4 and
Qwen2.5-14b. We use OpenAI API to call ChatGPT (GPT-
3.5-turbo-0806), GPT-4o-mini and GPT-4. Qwen2.5-instruct-
14b runs with 8 A40-40G without quantization, where the
temperature parameter is set to 0.7. The maximum token
length for the generation is set to 256. We set the maximum
flexible width of tree b to 7 in all the datasets, and set iteration
H in reasoning tree construction to 24 in the WebQSP, CWQ
and WebQuestions. In GrailQA,H is set to 18. The maximum
depth for judging leaf nodes is set to 5. The hyper-parameterα
in evaluation is set to 0.33. The filtered K weighted reasoning
paths is 10 in all datasets. The Freebase is used as KG for
CWQ, WebQSP, GrailQA and Webquestions.
TABLE III
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON THE WEBQSP AND CWQ. T HE BEST
RESULTS ARE IN BOLD AND THE SECOND BEST RESULTS ARE
UNDERLINED .
Methods WebQSP( EM↑) CWQ( EM↑)
LLM-Only Methods
Llama-3.1-8b 55.5 28.1
Qwen2.5-14b 59.0 39.8
ChatGPT 62.6 38.8
GPT-4 67.3 46.0
GPT-4o-mini 63.8 45.4
Graph-based Retrieval Methods
GraftNet 66.7 36.8
PullNet 68.1 45.9
NSM 68.7 48.6
SR+NSM 68.9 50.2
ReaRev 76.4 52.9
ERM+NSM 71.2 60.6
LLM-based Retrieval Methods
UniKGQA 79.1 51.2
DeCAF 82.1 70.4
RoG 85.7 62.6
GNN-RAG 85.7 66.8
StructGPT 72.6 54.3
Interactive KBQA 72.5 59.2
ToG w/ChatGPT 76.2 57.1
ToG w/GPT-4 82.6 68.5
ToG2.0 81.1 -
EPREM 88.8 66.2
PoG w/ChatGPT 82.0 63.2
PoG w/GPT4 87.3 75.0
RTSoG w/ChatGPT 90.5 (+1.7%) 79.3 (+4.3%)
RTSoG w/Qwen2.5-14b 92.2 (+3.4%) 78.9 (+3.9%)
RTSoG w/GPT-4o-mini 93.1 (+4.3%) 81.6 (+6.6%)
RTSoG w/GPT-4 94.3 (+5.5%) 82.8 (+7.8%)
B. Main Results (EQ1)
Table III and Table IV show the result of RTSoG and other
baselines across four representative KGQA datasets (WebQSP,
CWQ, GrailQA and WebQuestions). Overall, regardless of
which LLM is used as the policy model, RTSoG achieves
the best performance across all four datasets. Specifically, we
can make the following observations.
First, in the WebQSP and CWQ datasets, compared to tradi-
tional Graph-based retrieval methods and LLM-only methods,
the LLM-based retrieval methods show significant improve-
ments. Notably, RTSoG (with GPT-4) achieved the best results,
surpassing the ReaRev by 17.9% and 29.9% on the WebQSP
and CWQ, respectively. Moreover, RTSoG consistently out-
performed other LLM-based retrieval methods across different
LLMs used as policy models. Compared to the current best
PoG (with GPT-4), RTSoG showed an increases of 7.0% and
7.8% on WebQSP and CWQ under the same conditions. It is
noteworthy that even with a smaller open-source model (e.g.,
qwen2.5-14b), RTSoG achieves results comparable to those
of larger closed-source models (e.g., GPT-4 and ChatGPT).
Specifically, RTSoG (with qwen2.5-14b) achieved improve-
ments of 4.9% and 3.9% on two datasets compared to the
PoG (with GPT-4).
Secondly, across both GrailQA and WebQuestion datasets,
RTSoG consistently outperformed both fine-tuned LLM-based
retrieval methods and prompted LLM-based retrieval methods,
regardless of which LLMs are employed as policy models
or value models. Notably, on GrailQA, RTSoG achieves an
8.7% performance improvement over PoG when using the
same large language model (GPT-4). For more complex com-
positional problems, RTSoG demonstrates even more sub-
stantial enhancements, reaching a 15.1% improvement. This
indicates that through intent decomposition and reasoning
tree construction, RTSoG possesses superior capabilities in
problem comprehension and relevant information retrieval.
Furthermore, compared to fine-tuning approaches, RTSoG
shows more pronounced improvements, delivering an average
17.1% gain over GAIN.
Finally, as a training-free prompting method, RTSoG ex-
hibits relatively divergent outcomes when different LLMs
are adopted as policy models. Generally, when employing
larger and more advanced models such as GPT-4 and GPT-
4o-mini, RTSoG typically shows marginal superiority over
ChatGPT and qwen2.5-14b (averaging a 2% improvement).
However, given that OpenAI’s models are not open-source and
considering cost efficiency, practitioners may opt for smaller
yet open-source models (e.g., qwen2.5-14b) as both policy and
value models in practical applications.
C. Sensitivity Analysis (EQ2)
In this subsection, we conduct several experiments to an-
alyze the impact of four important hyper-parameters: the
number of subquestions n, the number of iterations H, the
flexible width of the tree b and the number of paths K in
S. We conduct these experiments on WebQSP and GrailQA,
using GPT-4o-mini as the policy model. First, we evaluate the
impact of the different number of subquestionsn. As shown in
Fig 2(a), when RTSoG does not perform question decomposi-
tion, the final performance is significantly lower than when
question decomposition is applied. This also indicates that
question decomposition can effectively reduce the difficulty of
the question and assist the subsequent SC-MCTS in exploring
reasoning paths. However, blindly increasing the number of
question decompositions does not lead to continuous perfor-
mance improvement, as the key points of the question can
only be broken down to a limited extent. When the number of

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 8
TABLE IV
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ON THE GRAIL QA AND WEBQUESTIONS . T HE BEST RESULTS ARE IN BOLD AND THE SECOND BEST RESULTS ARE
UNDERLINED .
Methods GrailQA (EM↑) WebQuestions (EM↑)
Overall I.I.D Compositional Zero-shot
LLM-Only Methods
ChatGPT 33.6 34.6 28.5 27.9 48.5
Qwen2.5-14b 31.6 32.4 36.0 34.9 48.5
GPT-4o-mini 36.7 36.8 32.2 31.8 52.3
GPT4 39.7 40.7 34.7 33.5 54.7
LLM-based Retrieval Methods (Fine-Tuned)
RnG-KBQA 68.8 86.2 63.8 63.0 -
TIARA 73.0 87.8 69.2 68.0 -
FC-KBQA 73.2 88.5 70.0 67.6 -
FlexKBQA 62.8 71.3 59.1 60.6 -
GAIN 76.3 88.5 73.7 71.8 -
LLM-based Retrieval Methods (Prompting)
KB-BINDER 50.6 - - - -
ToG w/ChatGPT 68.7 70.1 56.1 72.7 54.5
ToG w/GPT-4 81.4 79.4 67.3 86.5 57.9
PoG w/ChatGPT 76.5 76.3 62.1 81.7 60.6
PoG w/GPT4 84.7 87.9 69.7 88.6 67.1
RTSoG w/ChatGPT 91.5(+6.8%) 91.6(+3.1%) 81.3(+7.6%) 95.0(+6.4%) 82.2(+15.1%)
RTSoG w/Qwen2.5-14b 91.8(+7.1%) 92.5(+4.0%) 81.3(+7.6%) 95.2(+6.6%) 81.7(+14.6%)
RTSoG w/GPT-4o-mini 92.8(+8.1%) 93.7(+5.2%) 83.3(+9.6%) 95.7(+7.1%) 82.7(+15.6%)
RTSoG w/GPT-4 93.4(+8.7%) 94.5(+8.0%) 84.8(+11.1%) 95.9(+7.3%) 83.5(+16.4%)
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Fig. 2. The impact of four important hyper-parameters: the number of subquestions n, the number of iterations H, the flexible width of the tree b and the
number of paths K inS.
subquestion is 3, the RTSoG demonstrates higher performance
on both datasets.
Second, we vary the number of iterations H (6, 12, 18,
24) during the construction of the reasoning tree. As shown in
Fig 2(b), whenk is fixed, the EM scores of the final prediction
gradually increase with the number of iterations. This is be-
cause a higher number of iterations allows for the exploration
of more relevant knowledge in the knowledge graph, thereby
increasing the number of correct weighted paths. However,
balancing efficiency and final results, we choose 24 iterations
for WebQSP and 18 iterations for GrailQA.
Next, we change the flexible width of the tree b (3, 5, 7,
9) during the expansion step. As seen in Fig 2(c), when H
is fixed, the EM scores of the final prediction first gradually
increase with the width of the reasoning tree during the
expansion step, then tend to stabilize or decrease. In GrailQA,
it can be observed that when b rises to 9, the EM scores even
decrease. This phenomenon occurs because as b increases, the
model can explore more correct reasoning paths, but when
the width of the expansion tree is too large, it introduces
noise paths, which can degrade the performance of the model.
Therefore, considering both efficiency and result accuracy, b
is set to 7 for both WebQSP and GrailQA.
Finally, we change the number of reasoning paths in stack
S. The result in Fig 2(d). From these results, we can observe
that the performance declines when too few reasoning paths
are retained. This may be because the value model can not
generate the accurate reward of paths, leading to the filtering
out of some important reasoning paths. However, if the number
of selected paths is too large, it introduces noisy reasoning
paths, which negatively impacts the final answers. When the
number of reasoning paths is set to 10, the model achieves
optimal performance across multiple datasets.
D. Ablation Study (EQ3)
In this subsection, we conduct two ablation studies to ana-
lyze the SC-MCTS in the weighted reasoning paths retrieval.
First, we replaced the SC-MCTS in RTSoG with MCTS

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 9
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3. Ablation study on the self-critic mechanism and SC-MCTS in RTSoG.
TABLE V
ABLATION STUDY ON THE REASONING PATH STACK IN ANSWER
GENERATION .
Methods Datasets
WebQSP GrailQA
RTSoG
w/ Reasoning Path Stack 93.1 92.8
RTSoG
w/o Reasoning Path Stack 87.9 86.7
without the self-critic mechanism. As shown in Fig 3(a),
under the same number of iteration H and tree width b,
SC-MCTS achieved consistent improvements over MCTS on
both datasets: 7.4% on WebQSP and 9.8% on CWQ. This
improvement stems from the self-critic mechanism, which
allows timely termination of node expansion when further
exploration is unnecessary. This not only reduces the noisy
paths but also minimizes redundant computations.
Second, we removed the SC-MCTS in RTSoG and directly
utilized the decomposed sub-questions to guide the LLM to
generate answers. According to the results in Fig 3(b), it
is evident that omitting the weighted paths retrieval stage
achieved by SC-MCTS significantly reduces the model’s final
performance, with a decrease of 27.3% on WebQSP and
52.1% on GrailQA. This result clearly demonstrates that
the SC-MCTS effectively retrieves knowledge relevant to the
questions from the knowledge graph, thereby better assisting
the LLM in generating accurate answers. Additionally, it helps
mitigate potential issues such as out-of-date knowledge in the
LLM.
Finally, to analyze the importance of the paths stack in
answer generation, we directly use the weighted reasoning
paths for answer generation, without employing the reasoning
path stack. As shown in the table V, it indicates that using
the reasoning path stack improves the model’s final prediction
EM score, with an increase of 5.2% on WebQSP and 7.2% on
GrailQA. This finding suggests that when a series of weighted
reasoning paths are obtained, fully considering the different
weights of the paths can effectively eliminate some noisy
paths, and improve the performance of the model.
E. Efficiency Analysis (EQ4)
In this subsection, we will discuss the efficiency of the
model. Assuming the number of iterations of all the methods
TABLE VI
THE NUMBER OF LLM CALLS PER QUESTION
Methods ToG TOG2.0 PoG RTSoG
LLM Calls H× D H × D H × d1 2× H× b
is H, and the beam search width in ToG is D, the number of
LLM calls for the existing methods is shown in the table VI.
d1 is the exploration width of PoG, k is the flexible width of
the reasoning tree in RTSoG, and d1 <D , k <D. Although
RTSoG requires LLM calls during both the expansion and
evaluation steps, the number of LLM calls is still comparable
to other methods. It is noteworthy that RTSoG achieves better
results when using smaller open-source models like Qwen2.5-
14b compared to other baselines on closed-source large models
like GPT-4. This allows RTSoG to avoid the costly API call
expenses, resulting in a lower cost for practical applications.
Fig. 4. A typical case to analyze the difference between PoG and RTSoG in
exploring reasoning paths.
F . Case Study (EQ5)
In this subsection, we will conduct two case studies to
analyze how different methods explore reasoning paths and
the impact of SC-MCTS on RTSoG’s reasoning results.
First, to analyze the difference between PoG and RTSoG in
exploring reasoning paths, fig 4 shows a typical case in the
CWQ dataset. To answer the question “The national anthem
Afghan National Anthem is from the country which practices
what religions?”, it can be observed that the reasoning paths
retrieved by PoG are relatively short and do not provide
critical information for the final reasoning. The mid-form
entities “m.0493b56” lack semantic meaning. Therefore, the

JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021 10
Fig. 5. A typical case to to analyze the impact of SC-MCTS in weighted
reasoning paths retrieval.
wrong answer “Islam” generated by PoG relies on the internal
knowledge of the LLM, and the retrieved information does
not contribute to enhanced reasoning. However, the weighted
reasoning paths retrieved by RTSoG indicate that the “Afghan
National Anthem” is the national anthem of “Afghanistan”,
and within Afghanistan’s religious distribution, Sunni Islam
is one of the predominant religions. Moreover, this reasoning
path has a high score, providing strong support for the final
answer generation.
Second, to analyze the impact of SC-MCTS in weighted
reasoning paths retrieval, fig 5 shows a case in the CWQ. The
question is “What educational institution with men’s sports
team named Wisconsin Badgers did Russell Wilson go to?”.
When we replaced the SC-MCTS with MCTS in RTSoG,
the final explored reasoning path is shown in the upper part
of the fig, while the lower part displays the high-reward
reasoning paths discovered by the RTSoG. The path explored
by RTSoG without SC-MCTS shows that after reaching the
answer University of Wisconsin-Madison, the exploration does
not stop, ultimately leading the reasoning path to an incorrect
answer. This also demonstrates the importance of the self-
critic mechanism in SC-MCTS, which enables the timely
termination of the exploration, which not only reduces the
noisy paths but also minimizes redundant computations.
VI. C ONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we propose a novel framework named Reward-
guided Tree Search on Graph (RTSoG) for KGQA tasks,
which uses the Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) to better
balance the exploration and exploitation of reasoning paths in
KGs. Specifically, it first decomposes the original questions
into a series of simpler and well-defined sub-questions. Sec-
ond, RTSoG iteratively performs the Self-Critic Monte Carlo
Tree Search (SC-MCTS) on knowledge graphs to retrieve
weighted reasoning paths that support reasoning the answers.
Finally, it pushes the reasoning paths into the stack in order
of their weight, to generate the final answers. Extensive
experiments on four datasets demonstrate the effectiveness of
RTSoG. Typically, it achieves 8.7% and 7.0% improvement
over the state-of-the-art method on the GrailQA and the
WebQSP respectively.
