record_id: s2_snowball:ff3e4f7c2481fb6df539f02be5945235101cbc19
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2404.07972
fetched_title: OSW ORLD : Benchmarking Multimodal Agents for Open-Ended Tasks in Real Computer Environments
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T18:59:46Z

OSW ORLD : Benchmarking Multimodal Agents for
Open-Ended Tasks in Real Computer Environments
Tianbao Xie♠ Danyang Zhang♠ Jixuan Chen♠ Xiaochuan Li♠ Siheng Zhao♠
Ruisheng Cao♠ Toh Jing Hua♠ Zhoujun Cheng♠ Dongchan Shin♠ Fangyu Lei♠ Yitao Liu♠
Yiheng Xu♠ Shuyan Zhou♣ Silvio Savarese♡ Caiming Xiong♡ Victor Zhong♢ Tao Yu♠
♠The University of Hong Kong ♣CMU ♡Salesforce Research ♢University of Waterloo
Abstract
Autonomous agents that accomplish complex computer tasks with minimal human
interventions have the potential to transform human-computer interaction, signif-
icantly enhancing accessibility and productivity. However, existing benchmarks
either lack an interactive environment or are limited to environments specific to
certain applications or domains, failing to reflect the diverse and complex na-
ture of real-world computer use, thereby limiting the scope of tasks and agent
scalability. To address this issue, we introduce OSW ORLD , the first-of-its-kind
scalable, real computer environment for multimodal agents, supporting task setup,
execution-based evaluation, and interactive learning across various operating sys-
tems such as Ubuntu, Windows, and macOS. OSW ORLD can serve as a unified,
integrated computer environment for assessing open-ended computer tasks that
involve arbitrary applications. Building upon OSW ORLD , we create a benchmark
of 369 computer tasks involving real web and desktop apps in open domains, OS
file I/O, and workflows spanning multiple applications. Each task example is
derived from real-world computer use cases and includes a detailed initial state
setup configuration and a custom execution-based evaluation script for reliable,
reproducible evaluation. Extensive evaluation of state-of-the-art LLM/VLM-based
agents on OSW ORLD reveals significant deficiencies in their ability to serve as
computer assistants. While humans can accomplish over 72.36% of the tasks, the
best model achieves only 12.24% success, primarily struggling with GUI grounding
and operational knowledge. Comprehensive analysis using OSW ORLD provides
valuable insights for developing multimodal generalist agents that were not possible
with previous benchmarks. Our code, environment, baseline models, and data are
publicly available at https://os-world.github.io.
1 Introduction
Humans interact with computers to perform essential tasks in the digital realm, including web brows-
ing, video editing, file management, data analysis, and software development. These task workflows
often involve multiple applications through graphical user interfaces (GUI) and command line inter-
faces (CLI). Autonomous digital agents, powered by advancements in large vision-language models
(VLMs), have the potential to revolutionize how we interact with computer environments [28, 44, 1].
By following high-level natural language instructions, these agents can make digital interactions
more accessible and vastly increase human productivity. However, a major challenge in developing
such multimodal agents is the absence of a benchmark based on a real interactive environment that
covers the diversity and complexity of real-world computer use across various operating systems,
interfaces, and applications, consequently restricting task scope and agent scalability.
Previous benchmarks provide datasets of demonstrations without executable environments [9, 40,
21]. Their non-execution-based evaluation assumes a single solution for each task and wrongfully
penalizes alternative correct solutions. These benchmarks also miss opportunities for essential
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2404.07972v2 [cs.AI] 30 May 2024

Task Instruction
(See examples above)
input Agent
(e.g., GPT-4V)
a11y-tree
screenshot
keyboardmouse
Action
Observation
input
predict
OSWorld Environment
InterfacesOS
Task instruction 2: ...some details about snake game omitted… Could you help me tweak the code so the snake can actually eat the food?
Task instruction 1: Update the bookkeeping sheet with my recent transactions over the past few days in the provided folder.
Arbitrary Apps
Task Initial State Setup Config
task initial env state setup
Final State
get env state
Execution-based
Evaluation
Virtual Machine(s)
Figure 1: OSW ORLD is a first-of-its-kind scalable, real computer environmentfor multimodal agents,
supporting task setup, execution-based evaluation, and interactive learning across operating systems.
It can serve as a unified environment for evaluating open-ended computer tasks that involve arbitrary
apps (e.g., task examples in the above Fig). We also create a benchmark of 369 real-world computer
tasks in OSW ORLD with reliable, reproducible setup and evaluation scripts.
agent development methods like interactive learning and real-world exploration. Building realistic
interactive environments is a major challenge in developing multimodal agents. Prior work that
introduce executable environments simplify the observation and action spaces of human-computer
interaction and limit task scope within specific applications or domains, such as web navigation in
a few domains [44, 30, 58, 66], coding [57] and the combination [32, 54, 34]. Agents developed in
these restricted environments cannot comprehensively cover computer tasks, lacking the support of
evaluating tasks in complex, real-world scenarios that require navigating between applications and
interfaces in open domains (task examples in e.g., Fig. 1).
To address this gap, we introduceOSW ORLD , the first-of-its-kind scalable, real computer environment
designed for the development of multimodal agents capable of executing a wide range of real
computer tasks beyond isolated interfaces and applications. This executable environment allows
free-form raw keyboard and mouse control of real computer applications and supports initial task
state configuration, execution-based evaluation, and interactive learning across mainstream operating
systems (e.g., Ubuntu, Windows, macOS). As shown in Fig. 1, OSW ORLD enables evaluation
of open-ended computer tasks that involve arbitrary applications, ranging from image viewing to
software functionality integration and programming. Thus, OSW ORLD can serve as a unified,
real computer environment that allows users to define their agent tasks without the need to build
application/domain-specific simulated environments.
Building upon OSW ORLD , we create a benchmark with 369 real-world computer tasks that involve
widely-used web and desktop apps in open domains, OS file I/O, and multi-app workflows through
both GUI and CLI. Each task example is based on real-world computer use cases experienced by real
users and often requires interactions with multiple applications and interfaces. To ensure reliable,
reproducible assessment within the OSW ORLD environment, 9 authors with computer science
backgrounds carefully annotate each example with an initial state setup configuration to simulate
human work in progress and a custom execution-based evaluation script to verify task completion.
Our benchmark has a total of 134 unique evaluation functions, which are orders of magnitude larger
than prior work [66], showcasing the complexity, diversity, and evaluation challenges of tasks in our
benchmark. The human performance study indicates that task examples from OSW ORLD are more
time-consuming and challenging compared to those in prior work.
We extensively evaluate state-of-the-art LLM and VLM-based agent baselines, including the GPT-4V
series [39], the Gemini series [ 49, 41], the Claude-3 Opus [ 3] and the Qwen-Max [ 5], as well as
Mixtral [19], Llama-3 [35] and CogAgent [17] from the open-source community. The performance
of these experiments ranges from 0.99% to 12.24%, with subsets of applications even reaching 0%,
2

for workflow tasks that involve cooperation from multiple apps, the highest performance of the
baseline agent is only 6.57%. This indicates that current LLMs and VLMs are far from capable of
serving as computer assistants (§4.2). Results also show that while additional knowledge such as the
accessibility tree and Set-of-Mark (§4.1) can be helpful, it can also lead to potential misguidance and
varies across models. We also observe performance changes in these agents compared to consistent
human performance across different types of computer tasks. Analysis reveals that VLM-based
agents struggle to ground on screenshots to predict precise coordinates for actions, tend to predict
repetitive actions, are unable to handle noise from unexpected application windows and exhibit limited
knowledge of basic GUI interactions and domain-specific features of apps (§5.2, §5.4). Feeding
higher resolution and more trajectory history can help improve the performance by even doubling
while requiring longer context length and efficient modeling (§5.2). We open-source OSW ORLD
environment and benchmark, including environment initial state setup, reliable evaluation scripts,
documentation, and our implementation of baseline models to promote research towards the goal of
generalist capable computer agents 1. Future work can focus on enhancing VLM GUI grounding
abilities, including interaction commonsense knowledge, higher-resolution support, and coordinates
accuracy for more robust GUI interactions. Additionally, efforts can be made to improve agent
architectures to better handle complex computer tasks through exploration, memory, and reflection.
2 OSW ORLD Environment
In this section, we will introduce the task definition of autonomous agents, the components and
implementation of the OSW ORLD environment, and the supported observation and action spaces.
2.1 Task Definition
An autonomous digital agent task can be formalized as a partially observable Markov decision
process (POMDP) (S,O,A,T ,R) with state spaceS, observation spaceO (§2.3, including natural
languageI), action space A (§2.4), transition function T :S×A→S , and reward function
R :S×A→ R. Given current observation ot∈O (a natural language instruction observation and a
screenshot observation (e.g., computer screenshot), accessibility (a11y) tree, or their combination
according to facilities available), an agent generates executable action at∈A (e.g., clicking on the
certain pixel of the screen — .click(300, 540, button=‘right’) , press key combination —
.hotkey(‘ctrl’, ‘alt’, ‘t’) ), which results in a new state st+1∈S (e.g., current Desktop
environment) and a new partial observation ot+1∈O (e.g., current screenshot). The interaction loop
repeats until an action that marks termination (DONE or FAIL, see Sec. 2.4) is generated or the agent
reaches the max number of steps (e.g., 15 in our experiments). In this version of OSW ORLD , we
implement an execution-based reward functionR :S×A→ [0, 1] (§2.2.3). The reward function
awards a value of 1 or a positive decimal under 1 at the final step if the state transitions meet the
expectations of the task objective (i.e., the goal is successfully achieved or partially achieved), or if
the agent accurately predicts failure for an infeasible task. In all other scenarios, it returns 0.
2.2 Real Computer Environment Infrastructure
OSW ORLD is an executable and controllable environment that supports task initialization, execution-
based evaluation, and interactive agent learning in a range ofreal operating systems (e.g., Ubuntu,
Windows, macOS) using virtual machine techniques, shown in the middle and right of Fig. 2.
Virtual machine offers a safe isolated environment and prevents the agent resulting in irreversible
damaging effect on the real host machine. The snapshot feature also enables efficient reset of
the virtual environment. The environment is configured through a config file (shown in the left
of Fig. 2) for interface initialization during the initialization phase (including downloading files,
opening software, adjusting interface layout) (§2.2.2, highlighted with red in Fig. 2), post-processing
during the evaluation phase (activating certain windows, saving some files for easy retrieval of
information, highlighted with orange), and acquiring files and information for evaluation (such as
the final spreadsheet file for spreadsheet tasks, cookies for Chrome tasks, highlighted with yellow in
Fig. 2), as well as the evaluation functions and parameters used (§2.2.3, highlighted with green in
Fig. 2). See App. A.1 for more details.
1https://os-world.github.io
3

Virtual Machine
Control Receiver
Virtual Machine Platform
Task
Manager
Setup
Interpreter
Evaluation
Interpreter
Simulator
screen capture
accessibility tree
Getter
Metrics
Set-up
Virtual Machine
Control Receiver
VM 1
…
Agent
Coordinator
Reward
Config
by executing eval scripts
vmrun commands,
Flask commands
status, files, infos…
{ "instruction": "Please update my bookkeeping sheet with
the recent transactions from the provided folder, detailing
my expenses over the past few days.",
"config": [{"type": "download",
"parameters": {"files": [
{"path": "/home/user/Desktop/my_bookkeeping.xlsx",
"url": "https://drive.google.com/uc?id=xxxx"},
{"path": "/home/user/Desktop/receipt_0.jpeg",
"url": "https://drive.google.com/uc?id=xxxx"},…]}},
{"type": "open",
"parameters": { "path":
"/home/user/Desktop/my_bookkeeping.xlsx"}}],
"evaluator": {"postconfig": [{"type": "activate_window",
"parameters": {"window_name": "my_bookkeeping.xlsx -
LibreOffice Calc",... ],
"result": {"type": "vm_file",
"path": "/home/user/Desktop/my_bookkeeping.xlsx",
"dest": "my_bookkeeping.xlsx"},
"expected": {"type": "cloud_file",
"path": "https://drive.google.com/uc?id=xxx",
"dest": "my_bookkeeping_gold.xlsx" },
"func": "compare_table",
"options": {
"rules": [{
"type": "sheet_fuzzy",
"sheet_idx0": "RNSheet1",
"sheet_idx1": "ENSheet1",
"rules": [ {"range": [ "A1:A8",... }]}]
}
observations
actions
VM
Postprocess
Virtual Machine
Controller
Figure 2: Overview of the OSW ORLD environment infrastructure. The environment uses a configu-
ration file for initializing tasks (highlighted in red), agent interaction, post-processing upon agent
completion (highlighted in orange), retrieving files and information (highlighted in yellow), and
executing the evaluation function (highlighted in green). Environments can run in parallel on a single
host machine for learning or evaluation purposes. Headless operation is supported.
2.2.1 Overview
OSW ORLD environment runs on the host machine. Its Coordinator accepts a configuration file
at the initialization of a computer task, runs commands to automatically create a virtual machine
instance, and initializes the required state for the task through the Task Manager. The configuration
file specifies the snapshot of the virtual machine to be used (which stores the complete state of a
computer at a certain moment and can be restored to this state at any time) and also indicates the
information needed for setup (such as downloading files and opening some software, making some
additional settings, etc.). Once the environment is set up, agents start to interact with the environment,
receiving observations such as screenshots, the accessibility (a11y) tree, and customized streams such
as terminal outputs. Agents subsequently generate executable actions ( e.g., .click(300, 540) )
that manipulate the keyboard and mouse. Each action of the agent is input into the environment
as a code string, and the environment’s Simulator executes them in the virtual machine. After the
completion of a task, the Task Manager performs post-processing (such as file saving, or reopening
certain apps) according to the task’s post-config, retrieves data to the host machine (fetching images
or configuration files from the virtual machine or cloud, etc.), and then runs evaluation scripts to
assess the completion of the task. Multiple virtual machines can run simultaneously on a single host
machine, thereby parallelizing training and evaluation.
2.2.2 Initial Task Environment Setup
Many real-world scenarios requiring assistance occur not at the beginning of digital activities, such
as right after launching an application or when a computer has just been started, but rather at
intermediate stages, such as when certain software is already open or the computer has experienced a
crash. Therefore, we aim to simulate these intermediate states as closely as possible to replicate real-
world scenarios. The naturalness we bring in also leads to more challenges for agents to model and
explore. We adopted a hybrid approach for configuration instead of solely relying on example-wise
snapshots for restoration since it would store much unnecessary hardware state information, resulting
in each example requiring gigabytes of space. The procedure is divided into three stages: start the
VM emulator, prepare files (download the files or scripts from the cloud, etc. optional), and execute
reprocessing commands (open files or tabs, change the window size, etc. optional). We provide
convenient APIs to configure initial conditions and world settings, standardizing our tasks to make
this process user-friendly and easily extendable for scaling. For more details on setup see App. B.5.
2.2.3 Execution-Based Evaluation
Evaluating the successful execution of general computer tasks presents a significant challenge, as these
tasks defy reduction to a uniform pattern or measurement by a single metric. To ensure a thorough
assessment, we design example-specific evaluation metrics including pre-setup, post-processing, and
4

Table 1: Examples of our annotated evaluation scripts, which involve retrieving data from configura-
tion files, the environment, and the cloud, and executing functions to assess functional correctness and
obtain results. The example-wise evaluation facilitates the diversity of tasks and reliable evaluation
of complex, real-world, open-ended tasks.
Initial State Task Instruction Evaluation Script (Simplified)
Can you help me clean up my com-
puter by getting rid of all the cook-
ies that Amazon might have saved?
cookie_data = get_cookie_data(env)
rule = {"type":"domains",
"domains":[".amazon.com"]}
is_cookie_deleted(cookie_data, rule)
Rename “Sheet 1” to “LARS Re-
sources”. Then make a copy of
it. Place the copy before “Sheet
2” and rename it by appending a
suffix “(Backup)”, ...
result = get_file(env)
expected = get_file(cloud)
rules = [{"type":"sheet_name"},
{"type":"sheet_data",
"sheet_idx0":0,
"sheet_idx1":1}...]
compare_table(result, expected, rules)
I’ve drafted an e-mail reminder
for those who haven’t paid tuition.
Please help me to check out their e-
mails from the payment record and
add to the receiver field.
tree = get_a11y_tree(env)
rules = [{"selectors":
["tool-bar[attr|id=MsgHeadersToolbar]
label[name=To]
[attr|class=\"address-pill\"]>
label[attr|class=\"pill-label\"]
[name*=\"fox@someuniversity.edu...]
check_a11y_tree(tree, rules)
dedicated functions, tailored to the software in use and the task’s specific requirements. This involves
interpreting the software’s internal files, utilizing specific packages, and preemptively setting up
scaffolding based on the software’s permissions (e.g., opening remote debugging ports for Chrome
and VLC, creating extensions for VS Code). Occasionally, this process may also require assistance
from reverse engineering tools, such as for decrypting account information in Thunderbird.
As a result, we construct a vast collection of functions that make final wrangling and retrieve files
and data information of varying types, categories, and granularities from the cloud and software from
virtual machines as well as evaluation functions covering different aspects and their combinations,
inputting this information as parameters to assess the outcomes. We show some evaluation examples
in Tab. 1. , demonstrate the retrieval of cookie data from virtual machines, obtaining files from both
virtual machines and cloud services, fetching the current runtime interface’s accessibility tree from
the virtual machines, and determining success based on this information whether Amazon’s cookies
have been deleted, whether the generated table is accurate, and whether the correct interface has
been accessed. Need to note when the type of task has real-time characteristics (such as the number
of citations of someone’s paper, the content of blogs,etc.), we include dynamic functions (such as
crawler scripts) inside getter to obtain the real-time values at the moment of evaluation and then use
them to compare with the results obtained by the agent upon task completion. See more in App. B.6.
2.3 Observation Space
The observation space in OSW ORLD contains a complete screenshot of the desktop screen ,
including the mouse’s position and shape, various application windows, files, and folders that are
opened in different sizes and orders, maintaining the same perception as a human. Also, to be
aligned with previous agent-building web and mobile research [30, 27, 9, 66] that provide and support
the use of the webpage’s DOM and app’s view hierarchy,OSW ORLD also provides XML-format
accessibility (a11y) tree (obtained via ATSPI 2 on Ubuntu, via PyWinAuto on Windows,etc.), which
can support additional information for modeling. These raw observations allow rich interactions
between multiple applications but induce challenges in long-horizon decision-making from high-
resolution images (e.g., 4k screenshots) and structured long text (e.g., accessibility trees). For more
detailed information on observation space, refer to App. A.2.
2.4 Action Space
2https://docs.gtk.org/atspi2/
5

Table 2: Some examples of the mouse and keyboard ac-
tionsA in OSW ORLD . See App. A.3 for the complete
list.
Function Description
moveTo(x, y) Moves the mouse to the specified coordinates.
click(x, y) Clicks at the specified coordinates.
write(‘text’) Types the specified text at the current cursor location.
press(‘enter’) Presses the Enter key.
hotkey(‘ctrl’, ‘c’) Performs the Ctrl+C hotkey combination (copy).
scroll(200) Scrolls up by 200 units.
scroll(-200) Scrolls down by 200 units.
dragTo(x, y) Drags the mouse to the specified coordinates.
keyDown(‘shift’) Holds down the Shift key.
keyUp(‘shift’) Releases the Shift key.
WAIT Agent decides it should wait.
FAIL Agent decides the task is infeasible.
DONE Agent decides the task is finished.
Action spaceA in OSW ORLD encom-
passes all mouse and keyboard actions,
including movement, clicks (left-key,
right-key, multiple clicks), dragging,
keystrokes, hotkeys, and others, covering
all human-computer action space. Some
action examples are shown in Tab. 2 and
the complete action list can be found
in Appendix A.3. We use the widely
used mouse and keyboard control library
pyautogui3 for our action space. This
library leverages the high-level program-
ming language Python to replicate and
replay various human inputs into com-
puters through code, allowing us to con-
struct a universal and complete representation of actions. The agent must generate syntax-correct
pyautogui Python code to predict valid actions. Basic actions, such as press and moveTo, can be
integrated within program structures, such as for-loops, significantly improving the expressiveness
of an action. Timing is also crucial, as highlighted in previous studies on mobile devices [ 50], as
well as the ability to determine whether a task is infeasible or completed. Therefore, we add three
special actions named WAIT, FAIL, and DONE to enhance the aforementioned action spaces. Previous
efforts towards creating domain-specific agents, such as MiniWoB++ [ 44, 30], CC-Net [18], and
WebArena [66, 22], have defined action spaces that include clicks and typing, as well as some actions
specially designed for web browsing. However, they do not model all possible actions on a computer,
leading to limitations when attempting actions like right-clicking and clicking with the ctrl key held
to select items. This imposes an upper bound on agent learning capabilities.
3 OSW ORLD Benchmark
We introduce the OSW ORLD benchmark, which encompasses 369 real computing tasks defined
and executed on Ubuntu. Additionally, we provide a set of 43 tasks for Windows built on the
OSW ORLD environment. 4 The environment preparation, annotation process, data statistics, and
human performance are described in this section.
3.1 Operating System and Software Environments
OSW ORLD supports real operating systems, including Windows, macOS, and Ubuntu, for the
development of automated computer agents. For development purposes, we offer an extensive set
of examples on Ubuntu and its open-source applications, leveraging their open-source nature and
more accessible APIs for task setting and evaluation. We also provide annotated testing examples
for Windows, focusing on applications with similar functionalities. For the first time, our real
OS environments enable us to define all kinds of computer tasks, including those that involve
interacting with multiple applications (e.g., Chrome and file manager) and interfaces (GUIs and
CLIs). Considering availability, the strength of the user community, and diversity, we mainly focus
on eight representative applications as well as the basic ones system provide: Chrome for web
browsing, VLC for media playback, Thunderbird for email management, VS Code as a coding IDE,
and LibreOffice (Calc, Writer, and Impress) for handling spreadsheets, documents, and presentations
respectively, GIMP for image editing, and other basic OS apps like terminal, file manager, image
viewer, and PDF viewer. Each example drawn from these applications separate or in combination
showcases distinct operational logic and necessitates skills including commonsense knowledge,
high-resolution perception, mastery of software shortcuts, and the precise controlling of mouse and
keyboard movements. For more details, check App. B.1 and B.2.
3.2 Tasks
We create a benchmark suite of 369 real-world computer tasks on Ubuntu environment collected
from authors and diverse sources such as forums, tutorials, guidelines, etc., to show the capability
3https://pyautogui.readthedocs.io/en/latest/
4Due to copyright issues, these Windows tasks require further activation by the user.
6

for open-ended task creation within OSW ORLD . Each example is carefully annotated with a natural
language instruction, a setup configuration with corresponding files and setup actions for initialization
of initial states upon our provided VM image, and a manually crafted evaluation script to check if
the task is successfully executed. We also adapt 43 tasks from the Ubuntu set for analytic usage
on Windows. Overall, it takes 9 computer science students (all student authors) over 3 months,
consuming approximately 1800 man-hours (650 hours on single-app tasks, 750 hours on workflow
tasks and 400 hours for double-checking).
Task instructions and scenarios To draw the most diverse and close-to-reality usage cases, we ex-
plore several types of resources, including official guidelines & tutorials, video pieces giving tips and
tutorials on the Internet (e.g., TikTok and YouTube), how-to websites (e.g., WikiHow), Q&A forums
(e.g., Reddit, Quora, Superuser, & StackOverflow), formal video courses (e.g., Coursera and Udemy),
and publicly-available personal blogs & guidelines. The detailed resources used in our benchmark are
listed in App. B.3. The examples are selected by judging their popularity, helpfulness, and diversity,
revealed by the views and votes. Meanwhile, we notice that it is challenging to find enough examples
on the internet for tasks that involve the collaboration of multiple software applications. Therefore, the
authors conducted extensive brainstorming, combining some existing examples or drawing inspiration
from daily-life scenarios, to compile the tasks. The instructions and task-related files are then crafted
from these real-world guidelines and questions by the authors. After the selection, each example
will be cross-checked by the other two authors on the feasibility, ambiguity, and alignment with the
source. We not only collect tasks that can be finished, but also collect the infeasible ones that are
inherently impossible to be completed due to deprecated features or hallucinated features raised by
real users, which results in 30 infeasible examples in our benchmark. Additionally, to demonstrate
the unification ability of OSW ORLD environment for the creation of open-ended computer tasks, we
also integrate 84 examples from other benchmarks focusing on single-application or domain-specific
environments such as NL2Bash [29], Mind2Web [9], SheetCopilot [25], PPTC [14], and GAIA [36].
Refer to App. B.4 for more details and B.8 for sampled examples for the showcase. A total of about
400 man-hours were spent to collect these examples.
Initial state setup configs To construct the initial state, we prepare the files required for the task
and set up the initial state. For the files, we try to obtain them from the sources of the tasks we found,
or, in cases where the files are not publicly available, we recreate them as realistically as possible
based on scenarios. For the initial state setup, we also developed some functions based on the APIs
of software and OS to control the opening and resizing of software windows and reimplement some
functions that are difficult to achieve with APIs using pyautogui. For different tasks, we write configs
to set the files and initial steps in the virtual machine and verify them in the environment. For example,
the setup stage (highlighted in red color, keyed as “config”) in Figure 2 involves downloading files
into the virtual machine to prepare a close-to-reality initial environment, and then opening the file of
interest with the corresponding application. The setup steps for each example take about 1 man-hours
to construct.
Execution-based evaluation For each task, we select the appropriate getter functions, evaluator
function, and parameters to compose the configuration file. The getter function is used to extract
key components (e.g., the modified file, the text contents displayed in a window element) from the
final state of the environment, and the evaluator function assesses success based on the extracted key
components. If a function does not exist, we will construct it and add it to the function library of the
environment. After completing each evaluation, the annotator conducts initial tests with self-designed
test cases. Then, in the human evaluation and experiment running phases, each example is further
scrutinized and iterated upon by different individuals three times from the perspective of alignment
with the instruction and correctness under different solutions. As a result, we implement nearly
sample-specific executable evaluation scripts, resulting in a total of 134 unique evaluation functions
for assessing functional correctness—significantly more than the previous benchmarks. The average
time spent on developing the evaluation for an example and its examination amounts to approximately
2 man-hours from graduate students.
Quality control Once annotation is finished, each example is attempted by two authors who did
not participate in annotating that specific example, acting as agents to complete the task. This process
evaluates the current example’s quality and provides feedback to the annotators (such as unclear
instructions or inability to complete the task, crashes in corner cases, serious instances of false
7

positives and negatives, etc.), and involves joint revisions and supplements. During experiments for
human performance and baselines, we further fixed examples found to have issues, dedicating over
400 man-hours for four rounds of checks. Further investment of time and a more red teaming could
further reduce false positives and negatives, which we will leave to future work.
3.3 Data Statistics
Table 3: Key statistics in OSW ORLD .
The “Supp. tasks” refers to the Windows-
based tasks, that could only be used after
activation due to copyright restrictions.
Statistic Number
Total tasks (Ubuntu) 369 (100%)
- Multi-App Workflow 101 (27.4%)
- Single-App 268 (72.6%)
- Integrated 84 (22.8%)
- Infeasible 30 (8.1%)
Supp. tasks (Windows) 43
Initial States 302
Eval. Scripts 134
Files 2.2%
Settings 2.4%
Terminal 1.9%
Visualization 1.9%
Processing 7.0%
Tab. formatting 3.8%Slide settings 4.1%
Slide editing 8.7%
Doc. settings 1.6%
Doc. editing 4.6%
Image ops 7.0%
Configuration 3.8%
Code assist 2.4%
File ops 8.1%
Multimedia 4.6%
Data analysis 8.9%
Misc. 5.7%Settings 5.7%
Info query 4.1%
Shopping 2.7%
Account ops 1.6%
Email ops 2.4%
Video control 4.6%
OS 6.5%
31.7%
13.3%
Workflow
27.4%
Daily
21.1%
Office
Professional
Figure 3: Distribution of task instructions in OS-
WORLD based on the app domains and operation
types to showcase the content intuitively.
Statistics To facilitate the analysis and comprehension of the agent’s capabilities, we cluster the
examples into the software categories. Specifically, these categories include OS, Office (LibreOffice
Calc, Impress, Writer), Daily (Chrome, VLC Player, Thunderbird), Professional (VS Code and
GIMP), and Workflow (tasks involving multiple apps). The main statistics of OSW ORLD are
presented in Tab. 3 and Fig. 3, showcasing the outline and a broad spectrum of tasks. Specifically,
OSW ORLD contains a total of 369 tasks (and an additional 43 tasks on Windows for analysis), with
the majority (268 tasks or 72.6%) aiming at single application functionalities and a remarkable section
of workflow-related tasks (101 tasks or 27.4%). The dataset’s diversity is further affirmed by the
inclusion of tasks considered infeasible, totaling 30 tasks or 8.1% of the dataset. Additionally, a total
of 84 tasks (22.8%) are integrated from related datasets, highlighting the dataset’s applicability in
universal modeling. Remarkably, the dataset incorporates 302 distinct initial states and 134 different
evaluation scripts, underscoring the comprehensive approach towards evaluating the tasks’ complexity
and requirements. More statistic details are available in App. B.4.
Comparison with existing benchmarks OSW ORLD is compared with a number of existing
benchmarks in Table 4. OSW ORLD take utilizes raw mouse and keyboard actions that is universal to
the computer environment, rather than focusing on specific computer applications (e.g., a browser [66,
9]), with multimodal observation including screenshot (Multimodal Support column). This universal
action space enables the constructed agents to handle general tasks in the digital world. Our executable
environment allows agents to freely explore during both the learning and evaluation phases, rather
than providing only static demonstrations to evaluate an agent’s prediction of the next step (Executable
Env. column). Moreover, it does not solely focus on interactions within a single app but also considers
interactions across multiple apps and the overall task (Cross-App column). Unlike many evaluations
that offer the same evaluation script or a few scripts for a certain type of task, the OSW ORLD
benchmark provides example-wise, execution-based evaluation for tasks. Specifically, the total of 134
unique execution-based evaluation functions in our benchmark is significantly more than previous
work, demonstrating the complexity, diversity, and evaluation challenges of tasks in our benchmark
(# Exec.-based Eval. Func. column). It also allow us to freely choose open-ended tasks and scale
to new environments, rather than struggling in crafting new ones. Constructing intermediate initial
states as task setup increases realism and poses challenges to the agents’ exploration capabilities
(Intermediate Init. State column).
3.4 Human Performance
8

Table 4: Comparison of different environments for benchmarking digital agents. The columns
indicate: the number of task instances and templates (if applicable) where the task instantiated from
templates through configurations (# Instances (# Templates)), whether they provide acontrollable
executable environment (Control. Exec. Env.), the ease of adding new tasks involving arbitrary
applications in open domains (Environment Scalability), support for multimodal agent evaluation
(Multimodal Support), support for and inclusion of cross-app tasks (Cross-App), capability to start
tasks from an intermediate initial state (Intermediate Init. State), and the number of execution-based
evaluation functions (# Exec.-based Eval. Func.).
# Instances
(# Templates)
Control.
Exec. Env.?
Environment
Scalability?
Multimodal
Support?
Cross-
App?
Intermediate
Init. State?
# Exec.-based
Eval. Func.
GAIA [36] 466 ✗ - ✗ ✗ ✗ 0
MIND 2WEB [9] 2350 ✗ - ✓ ✗ ✓ 0
WEBLINX [33] 2337 ✗ - ✓ ✗ ✓ 0
PIXEL HELP [27] 187 ✗ - ✓ ✗ ✗ 0
METAGUI [47] 1125 ✗ - ✓ ✗ ✗ 0
AITW [40] 30 k ✗ - ✓ ✗ ✓ 0
OMNI ACT [21] 9802 ✗ - ✓ ✗ ✓ 0
AGENT BENCH [32] 1091 Multi-isolated ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 7
INTER CODE [57] 1350 (3) Code ✗ ✗ ✗ ✗ 3
MINI WOB++ [30] 125 Web ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ 125
WEBSHOP [58] 12 k (1) Web ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ 1
WEBARENA [66] 812 (241) Web ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ 5
VW EBARENA [22] 910 (314) Web ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ 6
WORK ARENA [10] 23 k (29) Web ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ 7
WIKI HOW [61] 150 (16) Mobile ✗ ✓ ✗ ✗ 16
ASSIST GUI [13] 100 ✗ ✗ ✓ ✗ ✓ 2
OSW ORLD 369 Computer ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ 134
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
700
800
900Human Operation Time (s)
Ours median: 111.94s
WebArena median: 35.38s
WebArena Ours
30
40
50
60
70
80
90Accuracy (%)
Figure 4: Human operation time and accuracy on
OSW ORLD and WebArena.
We conduct human evaluations on each example
in our dataset, with annotators being computer
science major college students who possess ba-
sic software usage skills but have not been ex-
posed to the samples or software before. We
recorded the time required to complete each ex-
ample and whether their completion of the ex-
ample was correct. For comparison, we also
sampled 100 examples from WebArena [66] un-
der the same evaluation setup.
As illustrated, tasks from our dataset generally
required more time to complete, with a median
completion time of 111.94 seconds (compared
to 35.38 seconds in WebArena), and a significant
number of examples distributed at 900 seconds
or even more. In terms of accuracy, the human
performance on our tasks was approximately 72.36%, significantly lower than the 88% observed
on the pure web task dataset. These findings highlight the complexity and challenge of tasks in our
dataset, which demand more time and effort. The lower accuracy rate further indicates that our tasks
require a higher level of understanding and proficiency, underscoring the need for advanced models
and techniques to tackle them effectively.
4 Benchmarking LLM and VLM Agent Baselines
In this section, we present the implementation details and experimental settings for several state-of-
the-art LLM and VLM agent baselines on OSW ORLD benchmark, as well as their performance.
4.1 LLM and VLM Agent Baselines
We adopt state-of-the-art LLM and VLM from open-source representatives such as Mixtral [ 19],
CogAgent [17] and Llama-3 [35], and closed-source ones from GPT, Gemini, Claude and Qwen
families on OSW ORLD , to serve as the foundation of agent. We also explore methods such as the
Set-of-Marks aided approach [56, 11], which has been demonstrated to improve spatial capabilities for
visual reasoning. Our prior experiments following VisualWebArena [22] adopt few-shot prompting,
9

Table 5: Success rates of baseline LLM and VLM agents on OSW ORLD , grouped by task categories:
OS, Office (LibreOffice Calc, Impress, Writer), Daily (Chrome, VLC Player, Thunderbird), Profes-
sional (VS Code and GIMP) and Workflow (tasks involving multiple apps), for gaining insights from
interfaces and operation logic. See App. C.1 and C.5 for more details.
Inputs Model Success Rate (↑)
OS Office Daily Profess. Workflow Overall
A11y tree Mixtral-8x7B 12.50% 1.01% 4.79% 6.12% 0.09% 2.98%
Llama-3-70B 4.17% 1.87% 2.71% 0.00% 0.93% 1.61%
GPT-3.5 4.17% 4.43% 2.71% 0.00% 1.62% 2.69%
GPT-4 20.83% 3.58% 25.64% 26.53% 2.97% 12.24%
Gemini-Pro 4.17% 1.71% 3.99% 4.08% 0.63% 2.37%
Gemini-Pro-1.5 12.50% 2.56% 7.83% 4.08% 3.60% 4.81%
Qwen-Max 29.17% 3.58% 8.36% 10.20% 2.61% 6.87%
GPT-4o 20.83% 6.99% 16.81% 16.33% 7.56% 11.36%
Screenshot CogAgent 4.17% 0.85% 2.71% 0.00% 0.00% 1.11%
GPT-4V 12.50% 1.86% 7.58% 4.08% 6.04% 5.26%
Gemini-ProV 8.33% 3.58% 6.55% 16.33% 2.08% 5.80%
Gemini-Pro-1.5 12.50% 6.99% 2.71% 6.12% 3.60% 5.40%
Claude-3-Opus 4.17% 1.87% 2.71% 2.04% 2.61% 2.42%
GPT-4o 8.33% 3.58% 6.07% 4.08% 5.58% 5.03%
Screenshot CogAgent 4.17% 0.85% 2.71% 0.62% 0.09% 1.32%
+ A11y tree GPT-4V 16.66% 6.99% 24.50% 18.37% 4.64% 12.17%
Gemini-ProV 4.17% 4.43% 6.55% 0.00% 1.52% 3.48%
Gemini-Pro-1.5 12.50% 3.58% 7.83% 8.16% 1.52% 5.10%
Claude-3-Opus 12.50% 3.57% 5.27% 8.16% 1.00% 4.41%
GPT-4o 41.67% 6.16% 12.33% 14.29% 7.46% 11.21%
Set-of-Mark CogAgent 4.17% 0.00% 2.71% 0.00% 0.53% 0.99%
GPT-4V 8.33% 8.55% 22.84% 14.28% 6.57% 11.77%
Gemini-ProV 4.17% 1.01% 1.42% 0.00% 0.63% 1.06%
Gemini-Pro-1.5 16.67% 5.13% 12.96% 10.20% 3.60% 7.79%
Claude-3-Opus 12.50% 2.72% 14.24% 6.12% 4.49% 6.72%
GPT-4o 20.83% 3.58% 3.99% 2.04% 3.60% 4.59%
Human Performance 75.00% 71.79% 70.51% 73.47% 73.27% 72.36%
which involves using (observation, action) pairs as few-shot examples and inputting the current
observation to generate the action, but this resulted in poor performance (success rate of 2.79% under
pure-screenshot setting). We attribute the result to a lack of history encoding and change in the
prompting scheme. Therefore, in the experiments, we opt to utilize the context window by providing
the most recent 3 observations and actions in chat mode, i.e., alternating between “user” prompts and
“assistant” prompts, instead of the (observation, action) pairs. We use a temperature of 1.0 and top-p
of 0.9 and truncate from the beginning of the input if still exceeding the max tokens limit required by
the models. The prompts used in the experiments are provided in App.C.1. We heuristically request
the agents to complete the tasks within a max step limit of 15, which is enough for most tasks. We
present a summary of the results in Tab. 5 and analysis in Sec. 4.2. We implement the following four
types of input settings on LLM and VLM.
Accessibility tree We aim to evaluate whether the current advanced text-based language models can
reason and ground themselves in the context to generate the correct action. Since the original XML
format of accessibility tree contains millions of tokens, caused by countless elements, redundant
attributes, and a mass of markups, we opt to filter out non-essential elements and attributes, and
represent the elements in a more compact tab-separated table format. To be specific, we filter the
elements by their tag, visibility, availability, existence of text or image contents, etc. The detailed
filtering method is elaborated on in App. C.3. Only the tag, name, text, position, and size of the
remaining elements are kept and concatenated by tab character in the input. As the raw coordinates
are provided within the accessibility tree, the LLM is required to ground its action predictions to
accurate coordinates.
Screenshot This is the input format that is closest to what humans perceive. Without special
processing, the raw screenshot of the virtual machine is directly sent to the VLM. The VLM is to
understand the screenshot and predict correct actions with precise coordinates. The raw resolution
10

of the screen is set to 1920× 1080. In order to investigate the impact of input resolution, ablation
studies are also conducted with different resolutions by manually downsampling the screenshot.
Screenshot + accessibility tree To check if a combination with the accessibility tree can improve
the capacity of VLM for spatial grounding, we take this setting by inputting both raw screenshots and
a simplified accessibility tree.
Set-of-Marks Set-of-Marks (SoM) [56] is an effective method for enhancing the grounding capa-
bilities of VLMs such as GPT-4V , by segmenting the input image into different sections and marking
them with annotations like alphanumerics, masks, or boxes. We leverage the information from the
filtered accessibility tree and mark the elements on the screenshot with a numbered bounding box.
Following VisualWebArena [22] and UFO [59], we further combine the annotated screenshot with
the text metadata from accessibility tree, including the index, tag, name, and text of the elements5.
Instead of predicting precise coordinates, the VLM is supposed to specify the action object by its
number index, which will be mapped into our action space by post-processing. Ablation studies are
also conducted with different resolutions for SoM setting.
4.2 Results
LLMs and VLMs are still far from being digital agents on real computers. The results from
Table 5 show that when only using screenshots as input and adopting pyautogui as the code space,
the success rate of the model is only 5.26% to 5.80% even with the strongest VLMs GPT-4V and
Gemini-Pro-vision. Meanwhile, the most advanced batch of language models, when using the a11y
tree as input, has a success rate ranging from 2.37% to 12.24%. Overall, these figures of performance
are significantly lower than the human-level performance which is 72.36% overall for individuals
not familiar with the software. These gaps indicate that current LLMs and VLMs may still have a
significant gap from humans in performance, necessitating further research in this area. Another
surprising finding is that although Claude-3 Opus is reported to be competitive with GPT-4V on
common benchmarks [2], it falls far behind when used as a digital agent in OSW ORLD . We will
present a qualitative analysis and infer reasons in Sec. 5.4.
Agent performance has much higher variance than human across different types of computer
tasks. OSW ORLD is capable of simulating and evaluating the various software types and combina-
tion scenarios involved in people’s daily lives in an open-ended manner. We observe performance
based on software type grouping and find that agents based on LLMs show significant differences
across different subsets. As shown in Table 5, performance tends to be better in tasks oriented
towards CLI interfaces (such as OS-type tasks) compared to those based on GUI (such as Office
tasks involving clicks on spreadsheet interfaces and document processing). Moreover, the biases
between different models and settings are inconsistent, with gaps even exceeding 20%; another point
is that performance on workflow-type tasks involving multiple software is far below the figures on a
single software, generally below 5%. However, human performance is consistent across these tasks,
fluctuating around 70% without exceeding a 5% variance, forming a significant contrast with the
models. This suggests that the way humans understand and complete tasks may differ significantly
from the current logic and methods based on LLMs and VLMs.
A11y tree and SoM’s effectiveness varies by models. The a11y tree contains some attribute
information of visible elements, including window position and size, as well as some semantic
labels of the window. The performance gap illustrated in Table 5 between GPT-4V and Claude-3
with additional a11y tree information and under a pure screenshot setup suggests that it still has
significant room for improvement in accurately perceiving and reasoning GUI elements. Conclusions
are reversed for Gemini-Pro.
While applying SoM setting, there is a decline for GPT-4V in performance compared to directly
providing the model with screenshots and a11y tree inputs, which contradicts the widely shown
effectiveness of SoM in classic image understanding tasks [56], as well as in application areas like
web agents [65, 16]. We speculate that this is due to the tasks performed within operating systems
having higher resolution and much more elements, ( e.g., the cells in a spread table), leading to a
5This metadata is similar to but kind of different from that provided in the single a11y tree setting. To be
specific, the coordinates and size are replaced with element index.
11

significant amount of noise that counteracts the auxiliary role of bounding boxes. Some tasks also
require detailed operation on coordinate-level, which cannot be modeled by the bounding box that
SoM marks.
VLM agents with screenshot-only setting show lower performance, but it should be the ultimate
configuration in the long run. The setting that relies solely on screenshots exhibits the lowest
performance, at only 5.26%, among all. Surprisingly, it still achieves a decent outcome when
managing workflow tasks (involving multiple applications) that involve multiple applications. Despite
the performance, it is worth mentioning that this is the only configuration that does not require
additional information, such as an accessibility (a11y) tree, making it concise and in alignment with
intuitive human perception since the a11y tree may not be well-supported across all software or
cannot be obtained under noisy conditions (e.g., when the agent is restricted to viewing the computer
through peripheral screens), and the massive amount of tokens contained in the a11y tree (even
just the leaf nodes can have tens of thousands of tokens) can also impose an additional inference
burden on the model. Future work on purely vision-based agents could lead to stronger generalization
capabilities and, ultimately, the potential for integration with the physical world on a larger scale.
5 Analysis
In this section, we aim to delve into the factors influencing the performance of VLMs in digital
agent tasks and their underlying behavioral logic. We will investigate the impact of task attributes
(such as difficulty, feasibility, visual requirement, and GUI complexity), input measurements (such
as screenshot resolution, the influence of trajectory history, and the effect of UI layout), explore
whether there are patterns in the agent’s performance across different operating systems, and make a
qualitative analysis in the aspect of models, methods, and humans. All experiments, unless specifically
mentioned otherwise, are conducted using GPT-4V under the Set-of-Mark setting. Some takeaways
from the analysis are: 1) higher screenshot resolution typically leads to improved performance; 2)
encoding more a11y (text) trajectory history can boost performance, while not working for screenshots
(image); 3) current VLMs are not adept at image-based trajectory history context; 4) current VLM
agents are not robust to UI layout and noise; 5) the performance of VLM agents across OS is in
strong correlation; 6) VLM agents have common error types like mouse-clicking inaccuracies, limited
domain knowledge, and more types discussed in Sec. 5.4.
5.1 Performance by Task Difficulty, Feasibility and App Involved
We analyze the success rate across several additional subsets of tasks, as summarized in Tab. 6 and
will be discussed in the following sections.
Table 6: Success rate (SR) of GPT-4V
(SoM) across different types of tasks.
Task Subset % of Total SR ( ↑)
Easy 28.72% 16.78%
Medium 40.11% 13.12%
Hard 30.17% 4.59%
Infeasible 8.13% 16.67%
Feasible 91.87% 13.34%
Single-App 72.63% 13.74%
Multi-App Workflow 27.37% 6.57%
Task difficulty We categorize the tasks based on the
time required for human completion into three groups:
0∼60s (Easy), 60s∼180s (Medium), and greater than
180 seconds (Hard), as an indicator of difficulty. Across
these groups, the model’s success rate drops as the
required time increases, with tasks taking longer than
180 seconds becoming almost impossible to complete
(considering we have infeasible examples for agent’s
luckiness), whereas human performance across these
three groups is 84.91%, 81.08% and 49.57%, showing
a slight decline of the same trend but not to the extent
of being unachievable.
Feasibility We also divide tasks into groups of tasks infeasible (e.g., deprecated features or hallu-
cinated features) and tasks feasible, which requires the agents to have the ability to judge based on
their own knowledge and exploration results. As shown in Tab. 6, we observe that agents currently
perform slightly better in terms of infeasibility (16.67% to 13.34%), but overall, they are at a relatively
low level. It is noteworthy that we also observe in some methods and settings (such as under the
pure screenshot setting with the Gemini-Pro model), agents tend to easily output FAIL and refuse to
continue trying. This situation leads to some false positives in infeasible tasks. The focus needs to be
on improving overall performance.
12

Number of apps involved We also examined the performance based on whether the task involved
apps software or within a single app. As shown in Tab. 6, the average performance for tasks involving
a single app is low, at 13.74%, but still more than double the 6.57% observed for subsets of tasks
involving workflows across multiple apps. Within single-app scenarios, tasks involving GUI-intensive
Office apps generally performed the worst, with subsets such as LibreOffice Calc often scoring
zero (we show more detailed results in App. C.5). These findings highlight the need for improved
collaboration capabilities between software and enhanced proficiency in specific scenarios.
5.2 Performance by Multimodal Observation Variances
0.2 0.4 0.6 0.8 1.0
10
20
Ratio
Success Rate (%)
GPT-4V SoM
GPT-4V Screenshot
Figure 5: The effect of downsampling on the
screenshot on performance with down-sampling
ratios of 0.2, 0.4, 0.6 and 0.8 and run on a subset
(10%) of examples.
Higher screenshot resolution typically leads
to improved performance Despite the sig-
nificant progress in display technology (1080P,
2K, and 4K), most VLMs are still trained on
data far below these resolutions. We select the
screenshot-only input and SoM setting to test the
method’s performance under different screen in-
put down-sampling ratios (i.e., 0.2, 0.4, 0.6 and
0.8 of the original resolution), to evaluate the im-
pact of resolution changes on model recognition
ability and accuracy. The output coordinates of
the model for the screenshot setting are still ex-
pected to align with the original resolution (i.e.,
1080P). The effects of varying input resolutions
on performance are shown in Figure 5. For in-
puts based on pure screenshots, it is observed
that an increase in resolution directly correlates
with enhanced performance. This issue may arise from the discrepancy between the resolution of the
screenshot and the coordinates of the output. However, the scenario slightly differs on SoM. Interest-
ingly, a reduction in resolution to 768×432 (down-sampling ratio of 0.4) leads to an improvement in
the agent’s performance and further diminishing the resolution even more to a down-sampling ratio
of 0.2 results in a noticeable decline in performance.
0 2000 4000 6000 8000 10000 12000
T okens
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06Frequency Density (%)
90th Percentile: 6343.60
Figure 6: The length distribution of a11y tree as
observation from sampled trajectories.
1 2 3 >3
5
10
15
History Trajectory Length
Success Rate (%)
GPT-4V SoM
GPT-4V Screenshot
Figure 7: The effect of length of history on perfor-
mance with the history encoding length of 1, 2, 3,
and > 3 and run on a subset (10%) of examples.
Longer text-based trajectory history context
improves performance, unlike screenshot-
only history, but poses efficiency challenges
The main experiment revealed the decisive role
of the a11y tree in performance within the cur-
rent technological context. Even when we retain
key attribute elements based on heuristic rules
(keep nodes with tags of the document, item,
button, heading, label, etc.), LLMs still require
a sufficiently large context to process this infor-
mation effectively. To further understand this,
we sample some a11y tree observations from
OSW ORLD and conducted the statistical anal-
ysis, as shown in Figure 6. The analysis indi-
cates that a context length of 6000 is needed to
accommodate about 90% of cases for a single
observation. However, relying solely on current
observations inherently leads to agents making
repeated errors. Therefore, we include current
observations as well as past N rounds of obser-
vations and actions in the constructed prompts
(see appendix for more details), to explore the
impact on agent performance when N is set to 1,
2, 3, and all where we put as much context as
we can. The experimental results (as shown in
Figure 7) show the performance increase with
13

more history context for SoM. Future work on constructing models with enhanced capabilities for
longer context support and understanding reasoning, improving model efficiency, and designing new
agent architectures for efficient memory storage will have a significant impact on digital agents.
However, we also note that the inclusion of additional trajectory history does not enhance performance
under the pure screenshot setting. This suggests that contemporary advanced VLMs might not be
as adept at extracting robust contextual information from images as they are from textual data.
Strengthening this capability to harness information from images constitutes an important avenue for
future enhancements.
Position Size ClutterOriginal
20
40 36.5
15.04
25.39
50.79
Success Rate (%)
Figure 8: Decline in performance due to
window perturbations.
VLM agents struggle with perturbation of position and
size of application windows and irrelevant information
We continue to adopt the SoM setting and sample a subset
of 28 tasks that agents relatively well perform (with a
success rate of 50.79%) in OSW ORLD . At the beginning
of each task, we introduce disturbances to the windows
by 1) changing the position of the window; 2) changing
the size of the window to the minimal; 3) opening some
irrelevant software and maximizing them to clutter the
screen. This process generates several times more samples
from the subset of tasks to observe their performance. We
find current agents are not robust in handling all these
changes, which leads to a performance drop to over 60%
to even 80%. Surprisingly, we find agents can switch
the window to a certain degree but fail to maximize the
window as an intermediate step and are stuck on other things. This suggests that while agents possess
some capability to navigate between windows, they lack a comprehensive strategy for managing
window states effectively.
5.3 Performance across Different Operating Systems
Another key challenge in building universal digital agents is ensuring that these agents can maintain
efficient and consistent performance across different operating system environments. The differences
between OS and their software ecosystems can significantly impact an agent’s observation and action
spaces, leading to performance uncertainties. Here, we explore and analyze the correlation between
the success of agents in completing tasks on Windows after migrating from Ubuntu using examples
from OSW ORLD .
Table 7: Comparison of model performance
and correlation across operating systems.
OS SR (%) Correlation Coefficient
Ubuntu 4.88 0.7Windows 2.55
We enhance the functionality of the OSW ORLD envi-
ronment to support setting up initial experiment states,
final evaluations, and obtaining observations such as the
a11y tree and screenshots in Windows OS. Additionally,
we have made example-wise fine-tuning modifications
to the existing subset in OSW ORLD for migration to
Windows. We conduct evaluations using the GPT-4V
screenshot-only method and present the correlation of
performance across the two operating systems. As shown in Tab. 7, the model’s performance on
Ubuntu and Windows is 4.88% and 2.55%, respectively, with a correlation coefficient of 0.7, despite
the differences in their observation spaces. This implies that insights and methodologies developed
within the OSW ORLD framework can be effectively transferred to Windows environments with a
high degree of reliability.
5.4 Qualitative Analysis
In this section we highlight representative examples of success, failure, and surprising outcomes,
alongside a comparative study between GPT-4V and Claude-3 agents, to elucidate the unique
challenges and insights our environment introduces. See App. D for more details.
Success and failure cases We find agents, particularly based on GPT-4V , can successfully solve
tasks that involve complex problem-solving or creative thinking, showcasing the advanced under-
14

standing and processing capabilities of the model already. One successful task is shown in the first
row of Figure 9. The agent is requested to extract subtitle files from the video stream and save them
locally. The agent first divides the screen into two parts, with the VLC application window on the
left and the terminal window open on the right, and uses the ffmpeg command twice. The first use
removes the subtitles embedded in the original video, and the second use saves the extracted subtitles
locally.
Task Instruction: I downloaded an episode of Friends to practice listening, but I don't know how to remove the subtitles. Please
help me remove the subtitles from the video and export it as "subtitles.srt" and store it in the same directory as the video.
Step1: pyautogui.click(activities_x, activities_y) Step 3: pyautogui.click(focus_x, focus_y)
Step 4: pyautogui.typewrite('ffmpeg -i video.mp4 -map
0:s:0 subtitles.srt', interval=0.5)
Step 5: pyautogui.typewrite('ffmpeg -i video.mp4 -c copy
-sn no_subtitles_video.mp4', interval=0.5) Step 6: Done
Step 2: pyautogui.typewrite('terminal', interval=0.5)
Figure 9: The agent successfully understood the complex task instructions, extracted the subtitle file
from the video, and generated a pure video without embedded subtitles.
Despite the successes, there are notable failures that highlight the limitations of current models. In
the task of “center-aligning the title of the document” (Fig. 10 line 1), the agent fails to ground the
relatively simple requirement of “center alignment of texts”, performing many useless actions such
as selecting irrelevant words, opening irrelevant menus, etc.
Moreover, we find that the agent lacks prior knowledge in using software, performing poorly in many
specialized tasks (as shown in Fig. 16, with GIMP, LibreOffice Calc, and Chrome selected). Taking
GIMP as an example, for the instruction “reduce brightness” the agent does not know which menu in
the toolbar is for brightness adjustment and instead randomly tries until exhausting the maximum
number of steps.
Common errors by GPT-4V agents Among the 550 failed examples from different settings in
our sample, more than 75% exist mouse click inaccuracies, which is the most common error. The
agent fails to click the correct coordinates despite planning detailed and accurate steps in their code
comments, indicating strong planning but weak execution capabilities. Mouse click inaccuracies
lead to two other frequent errors: repetitive clicks and environmental noise dilemma. Repetitive
clicks occur when the agent repeatedly misclicks, adjusts, and fails, consuming too many steps.
Environmental noise arises from clicking unintended objects, causing pop-ups, or opening unrelated
applications. Due to a lack of prior knowledge about most professional software, it falls into a
mismatch dilemma between the actions taken and the current state, and don’t know how to get
back to normal. Moreover, the agent lacks basic human-like cognition of web pages, such as not
closing pop-ups in real-world web pages or being attracted by advertisement content, which affects
its original correct judgment. Failures also arise from misinterpretation of instructions and visual
oversight, highlighting the need for improvement in language and visual processing. See App. D.2
for the specific execution process.
Discrepancies in task difficulty between agent and human We identify notable disparities in
the perceived difficulty of tasks between humans and AI agents. Tasks that are intuitively simple
for humans often present substantial challenges to agents, and conversely, tasks that humans find
demanding can be more straightforward for agents to execute. You can find more details in Fig. 19
and App. D.3.
15

Task Instruction: help me center align the heading in LibreOffice.
Task Instruction: erase all the highlighted marks in this document
Task Instruction: use GIMP to cut out the 2s to 4s part of a video
Step 1: pyautogui.click(focux_x, focus_y) Step 2: pyautogui.moveto(coor_x, coor_y) Step 3: pyautogui.click(menu_x, menu_y) Step 4: Failed (Meaningless actions)
Step 2: pyautogui.mouseDown() Step 3: pyautogui.hotkey('ctrl', 'a') Step 4: Failed ( Did not find the right entrance)Step 1: pyautogui.click(libreoffice_writer)
Step 2: pyautogui.click(focus_x, focus_y) Step 3: pyautogui.typewrite('ffmpeg -ss …',
interval=0.05)
Step 4: Done, but doesn't follow the
instruction
Step 1: pyautogui.hotkey('ctrl', 'atl', 't')
Figure 10: Screenshots of the three examples mentioned in the quality analysis. The first line is an
example of GPT-4V failing at a very simple task, the second line is one example where agents face
more difficulty than humans, and the third line is one example that is more difficult for humans than
for agents.
Tasks where humans outperform agents These tasks mainly involve text-based and design-
related work, such as “bold the font on this slide and add notes” or “erase all the highlighted marks
in this document” (Fig. 10 Line 2). Since the Internet lacks such fine-grained data as the software
execution process, the agent also lacks the corresponding training process, so its grounding ability is
not good enough. The lack of understanding of GUI logic also causes poor performance on operations
like selecting and scrolling.
Tasks where agents outperform humans Tasks that the agent considers simple but humans find
difficult are concentrated in “code solvability tasks”, such as “monitor the system CPU for 30s and
output the results” and “force close a process”. These tasks require little or no GUI interaction and
can be completed by executing complex codes and instructions. It’s worth noting that completing
through code sometimes mismatches with human instructions. In the task "use GIMP to cut out the
2s to 4s part of a video,(Fig. 10 Line 3)" the agent used “ffmpeg” command to complete the video
cropping, ignoring the “use GIMP” requirement in the instructions.
Surprisingly, we discovered that agents are as prone to inefficiency in mechanically repetitive tasks,
such as copying, pasting, and batch editing of Excel sheets, as humans. Humans frequently commit
careless errors during execution. The shortcomings in agents stem either from the absence of an API
or from insufficient training data related to the API, hindering their ability to efficiently process tasks
in batches. Furthermore, sluggish response times can cause tasks to either time out or surpass the
maximum allowed steps.
Comparative analysis: Claude-3 vs. GPT-4V Although Claude outperforms GPT-4 in many
benchmarks such as GSM8K, HumanEval, etc., in our main experiment, we find that Claude has
an average lower accuracy rate compared to GPT-4V by 2.84% to 7.76%. We find that Claude can
provide satisfactory high-level solutions, but its grounding ability contains hallucinations in detail.
For instance, Claude would interpret double-clicking a file as selecting it instead of opening it, treat
column B in LibreOffice Calc software as column C, and enter text in the VS Code text replacement
box without clicking on global replace. This shows that Claude can align well with human planning
in problem-solving, but lacks excellent grounding ability when it comes to execution. Details can be
seen in Fig. 20 and App. D.4.
16

6 Related Work
Benchmarks for multimodal agents Testing digital interaction agents mainly spans coding en-
vironments, web scenarios, and mobile applications. In the coding domain, several works provide
frameworks and datasets for evaluating agents across programming languages and software engineer-
ing activities [57, 20, 24, 45]. For web browsing, platforms have been developed for agents to interact
with web interfaces through keyboard and mouse actions, alongside datasets focusing on open-ended
web tasks and realistic web navigation [44, 30, 58, 9, 66, 22, 10]. Mobile device interaction research
aims at improving accessibility, with simulators for mobile UI interactions and platforms dedicated to
InfoUI tasks [27, 47, 51, 50, 40, 61, 53, 60, 52]. Further, environments connecting to real computers
and datasets for GUI grounding, albeit without interactive capability, have emerged [13, 8, 38, 21, 48].
Comprehensive task evaluation across different aspects also sees innovations [ 32, 36]. Differing
from previous endeavors focusing on singular environments or lacking executability, OSW ORLD
integrates an interactive setup enabling agents to engage with operating systems openly, supported by
a diverse array of tasks and precise evaluation scripts within a fully controllable setting, marking it
as a competitive benchmarking realism and reliability, as well as an environment for learning and
evaluating general-purpose digital agent (See Tab. 4 for comparison).
Vision-language models for multimodal agents Many existing works on GUI interaction utilize
some form of structured data (such as HTML, accessibility trees, view hierarchies) as a grounding
source [9, 15, 27, 37, 64, 46, 62, 66]. However, source code often tends to be verbose, non-intuitive,
and filled with noise. In many cases, it is even inaccessible or unavailable for use, making multi-
modality or even vision-only perception a must. To take screenshots as input, there are already
specialized, optimized multi-modal models available that are suited for tasks on web [4, 12, 18, 23, 43]
and mobile devices [17, 63]. Additionally, general-purpose foundation models [5, 26, 31, 67] also
demonstrate significant potential for multi-modal digital agents. The development of prompt-based
methods [13, 16, 55, 65], as well as visual reasoning paradigms, have also further facilitated the
performance of digital agents in web pages, mobile apps, and desktop. To investigate how well do
current models and methods perform in digital agent tasks, our paper evaluates the results of text-only,
vision-only, and multi-modal input as well as across multiple methods, demonstrating that existing
multi-modal models are far from capable computer agents. Specifically, there is ample room for
improvement in long-horizon planning, screenshot details perception, pixel coordinate locating, and
world knowledge.
7 Conclusion and Future Work
In conclusion, the introduction of OSW ORLD marks a significant step forward in the development of
autonomous digital agents, addressing critical gaps in existing interactive learning environments. By
providing a rich, realistic setting that spans multiple operating systems, interfaces, and applications,
OSW ORLD not only broadens the scope of tasks digital agents can perform but also enhances their
potential for real-world application. Despite the promise shown by advancements in vision-language
models, evaluations within OSW ORLD reveal notable challenges in agents’ abilities, particularly in
GUI understanding and operational knowledge, pointing to essential areas for future research and
development.
We identify several potential directions for community development and progress toward general-
purpose agents for computer operation:
Enhancing VLM capabilities for efficient and robust GUI interactions For foundation model
development, we need to boost the efficiency of our models, enabling them to process much longer
contexts and perform inference computations efficiently, akin to the robotics community [6, 7] to
better handle real-world cases. Enhancements in VLMs’ GUI grounding capabilities that is robust
to application windows changes and are also sought, focusing on the accurate understanding and
generation of precise actions aligned with given instructions. Moreover, amplifying VLMs’ ability
to comprehend context in the form of images is a pivotal goal, since it is crucial to enable history
encoding using images so that we can build memory and reflection upon that. These improvements
may require more efforts in the upstream pre-training stage, downstream fine-tuning stage, and even
in the model structure itself, as pointed out in previous work [9, 17, 33].
17

Advancing agent methodologies for exploration, memory, and reflection The next-level ap-
proach encompasses designing more effective agent architectures that augment the agents’ abilities to
explore autonomously and synthesize their findings. The agents face challenges in leveraging lengthy
raw observation and action records. It’s fascinating to explore novel methods for encoding this history,
incorporating efficient memory and reflection solutions to condense contextual information and aid
the agent in extracting key information. Additionally, integrating knowledge grounding into (V)LLM
agents through memory mechanisms is a promising avenue as well. Moreover, practice GUI assistants
also require features of personalization and customization. These features rely on techniques such
as user profiling and retaining memories from long-term user-assistant interactions. Additionally,
crafting protocols specifically for digital agents operating within GUI and CLI interfaces aims at
facilitating efficient actions is also an essential thing for the feasibility of general-purpose digital
agents in the mid-short term.
Addressing the safety challenges of agents in realistic environments The safety of agents is
a critical issue if applying a built agent in fully realistic environments, the developed universal
digital agent could potentially be used to bypass CAPTCHA systems in the future, as noted in [42].
However, due to the currently limited capabilities of agents, we have not observed any harmful
and damaging behaviors during our experiments, an automatic agent has the opportunity to damage
patent rights, abuse accounts, attempt to exploit software vulnerabilities to create viruses, or engage
in attacks. Currently, we adopt virtual machines to make it difficult for developing digital agents
to cause irreversible damage to our host machines. However, there still lacks a reliable metric to
assess the safety of an agent developed in an isolated environment. The current evaluation functions
mainly focus on the results closely regarding the task instructions, assess only the correctness of task
completion, and pay little attention to potential unnecessary damaging actions of agents. Owing to
the complexity of a complete computer environment, we didn’t work out an efficient way to detect
the latent side effects of the agent. Consequently, how to assess and control potential behaviors in
open and real environments through environmental constraints and agent training is an important
further direction of research.
Expanding and refining data and environments for agent development In terms of datasets and
environments, we can broaden the scope to cover more specialized domains, including real-sector
needs in healthcare, education, industry, transportation, and personalized requirements. Efforts can
be made to ensure our environment’s seamless deployment across various hardware and software
settings. The variance of a11y tree quality across different applications is also noticed. Although the
problem is not remarkable in the applications currently included, there is no guarantee of that the
application developers obey the a11y convention and offer clear and meaningful descriptions for GUI
elements. More intelligent approaches to filter redundant a11y tree elements and to handle latently
missing elements deserve careful investigation as well. We also highlight the necessity of a painless
data collection method, allowing for the effortless acquisition of computer operation data and its
transformation into agent capabilities.
Acknowledgements
We thank Sida Wang, Peter Shaw, Alane Suhr, Luke Zettlemoyer, Chen Henry Wu, Pengcheng Yin,
Shunyu Yao, Xing Han Lu, Siva Reddy, Ruoxi Sun, Zhiyuan Zeng, Chengyou Jia, and Lei Li for their
helpful feedback on this work.
