record_id: s2_snowball:5d158be554d698151e9606969bdbb419d54fa762
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2507.15887
fetched_title: AlgoTune: Can Language Models Speed Up General-Purpose Numerical Programs?
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:01:07Z

AlgoTune: Can Language Models Speed Up
General-Purpose Numerical Programs?
Ori Press1 Brandon Amos3 Haoyu Zhao2 Yikai Wu2 Samuel K. Ainsworth
Dominik Krupke4 Patrick Kidger5 Touqir Sajed6 Bartolomeo Stellato2
Jisun Park2,7 Nathanael Bosch1 Eli Meril8 Albert Steppi9
Arman Zharmagambetov3 Fangzhao Zhang10 David Pérez–Piñeiro11 Alberto Mercurio12
Ni Zhan2 Talor Abramovich8 Kilian Lieret2 Hanlin Zhang13
Shirley Huang13 Matthias Bethge1 Ofir Press2
1 Tübingen AI Center, University of Tübingen 2 Princeton University 3 Meta (FAIR)
4 TU Braunschweig 5 Cradle Bio 6 LG Electronics Canada
7 Seoul National University 8 Tel Aviv University 9 Quansight PBC
10 Stanford University 11 Norwegian University of Science and Technology 12 EPFL 13 Harvard
University
Abstract
Despite progress in language model (LM) capabilities, evaluations have thus far
focused on models’ performance on tasks that humans have previously solved,
including in programming (Jimenez et al., 2024) and mathematics (Glazer et al.,
2024). We therefore propose testing models’ ability to design and implement algo-
rithms in an open-ended benchmark: We task LMs with writing code that efficiently
solves computationally challenging problems in computer science, physics, and
mathematics. Our AlgoTune benchmark consists of 154 coding tasks collected
from domain experts and a framework for validating and timing LM-synthesized
solution code, which is compared to reference implementations from popular open-
source packages. In addition, we develop a baseline LM agent, AlgoTuner, and
evaluate its performance across a suite of frontier models. AlgoTuner uses a simple,
budgeted loop that edits code, compiles and runs it, profiles performance, verifies
correctness on tests, and selects the fastest valid version. AlgoTuner achieves an
average 1.72× speedup against our reference solvers, which use libraries such as
SciPy, sk-learn and CVXPY . However, we find that current models fail to discover
algorithmic innovations, instead preferring surface-level optimizations. We hope
that AlgoTune catalyzes the development of LM agents exhibiting creative problem
solving beyond state-of-the-art human performance.
1 Introduction
Language models have become increasingly capable at tasks in programming and mathematics (Liu
et al., 2024; Anthropic, 2025a; Google DeepMind, 2025). But the research community has mostly
focused on studying their ability to write simple standalone functions from scratch, as in Hu-
manEval (Chen et al., 2021), MBPP (Austin et al., 2021), LiveCodeBench (Jain et al., 2024), and Aider
Polyglot (Gauthier, 2024); or to fix bugs in existing software libraries, as in SWE-bench (Jimenez
et al., 2024).
These benchmarks challenge AI systems with problems that have previously been solved by humans.
For example, SWE-bench tasks consist of fixing historical bugs on GitHub, all of which have been
fixed. HumanEval and the similar followups task LMs with reproducing human-written code based
on given descriptions.
39th Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS 2025) Track on Datasets and Benchmarks.
arXiv:2507.15887v4 [cs.SE] 24 Oct 2025

Optimize the Code Compare to BaselinePick a Task
AlgoTune
Testing Suitenumpy.qr

python.gzip

networkx.pagerank
Language
Model
Time Generated Code
Reference: 154 tasks including: Generated: Score:
1 2 3
105.5ms

99.4ms

49.7ms
75.6ms

99.4ms

1.6ms
1.4x

30x
1x

Figure 1: AlgoTune challenges LMs to optimize 154 numerical functions, including QR Decompo-
sition, gzip Compression and PageRank. We score LMs based on how much faster their generated
code is than reference solvers. For concrete examples, see §4.2.
But what if AI could go beyond what has already been done? What if AI systems could take optimized
code from a popular Python library like Numpy (Harris et al., 2020), SciPy (Virtanen et al., 2020) or
NetworkX (Hagberg et al., 2008) and make it ever faster?
To measure this, we introduce AlgoTune, a benchmark designed to assess the ability of LM systems
to optimize the runtime of 154 functions in a wide variety of domains including Math (Cholesky
factorization, Matrix exponential), Science (The FitzHugh–Nagumo ordinary differential equations,
Heat Equation), Computer Science (SHA256 hashing, Graph Isomorphism, KD Tree Construction,
gzip compression), and Machine Learning (Lasso regression, Kalman filters).
Existing code benchmarks contain tasks that have a binary outcome: the model either solves the task
at hand – programming a specified function or fixing a bug – or it fails to do so. In AlgoTune, we
score systems based on the speed of their synthesized code relative to a reference implementation, a
metric with no absolute upper bound. We argue that AlgoTune narrows the gap between benchmark
objectives and real-world goals: success on this benchmark could translate to tangible performance
gains in widely used numerical libraries.
To improve the speed of a reference function, language models can utilize a variety of techniques,
including implementing faster algorithms or rewriting the code in a lower-level language like C.
Finding a faster algorithm may in some cases involve searching in the existing literature: one of
our tasks uses SciPy’sspatial.kd_tree, which uses the algorithm from Maneewongvatana and
Mount (1999), but more recent works such as Muja and Lowe (2014) have proposed faster algorithms.
In other cases, optimizing the given reference algorithm might require the LM to discover a novel
approach.
In addition to our benchmark, we propose an LM agent, AlgoTuner, that iteratively develops efficient
code for AlgoTune tasks. To enable writing efficient code, we equip AlgoTuner with tools including
Cython (Behnel et al., 2011) and Numba (Lam et al., 2015) (see Appendix D for the complete list).
When running on o4-mini-high, AlgoTuner is able to optimize code for 59.7% of the AlgoTune tasks,
yielding an AlgoTune score of 1.72×. As we show in §4, these speedups are minor surface-level
optimizations. We did not observe AlgoTuner finding any novel algorithmic improvements across
any of the LMs tested.
Our contributions are threefold: 1) a benchmark that challenges LMs to optimize 154 functions in a
wide variety of domains, including functions from popular open-source repositories, 2) a test suite
that allows for robustly testing and timing AI-synthesized code for correctness, and 3) the AlgoTuner
agent that can iteratively attempt to optimize a given function using any frontier LM.
Concurrently, KernelBench (Ouyang et al., 2025) challenges LMs to develop CUDA GPU ker-
nels, evaluated on their speed. They focus on narrow, specific PyTorch operations such as
Matmul_Add_Swish_Tanh_GELU_Hardtanh or neural network blocks such asEfficientNetB2,
whereas AlgoTune contains a range of numerical functions across a wide array of domains.
We hypothesize that further work in this direction may lead to a future in which LMs are used to
autonomously write highly-optimized code, potentially via novel algorithmic discovery. Our software
2

makes this process simple: users enter a function of interest, write an input data generator and output
verifier, and get back an optimized version of their code.
2 The AlgoTune Benchmark
This section defines the benchmark scope (domains, taxonomy, and design principles) (§2.1), explains
task construction (generators, reference solvers, verifiers, and QA) (§2.2), and details the evaluation
protocol (instance sizing, timing, metrics, splits, and budget) (§2.3). Together, these subsections
specify how tasks are generated, how correctness and speedups are measured, and how results can be
reproduced.
2.1 Benchmark Scope
The AlgoTune benchmark consists of 154 tasks, challenging AI systems to write performant code
for a variety of numerical and scientific problems, such as Graph Coloring, Spectral Clustering, and
the Wasserstein distance function. We score an AI system based on how much faster its generated
implementations are relative to our reference implementations. Our reference implementations use
functions from popular libraries such as NumPy (Harris et al., 2020), SciPy (Virtanen et al., 2020),
and NetworkX (Hagberg et al., 2008).
AlgoTune’s test suite includes a solution verifier that runs an AI-generated implementation on a
held-out test set of inputs to ensure correctness, and a runtime profiler that measures the wall-clock
execution time of the code. The AI system’s score for each task is the multiple of how much faster
the synthesized code is than the reference implementation on the test input set.
Where possible, our reference implementations are simply calls to functions from popular Python
packages because 1) these repositories contain extensive test suites, increasing confidence in the
reference implementation correctness and 2) their popularity makes it so that further optimizations to
these functions may have a direct real-world impact.
Data Contamination. Most existing benchmarks consist of a test set of questions and answers, and
if this set leaks into training data, it causes the resulting LM to perform well on the test set without
extrapolating to novel, real-world queries (Dong et al., 2024). AlgoTune bypasses this issue by not
having answers. Instead we rely on reference solvers that are already publicly known and which we
also include in the prompt shown to agents solving AlgoTune tasks.
Can functions in popular Python repositories be sped up? NumPy (Harris et al., 2020), SciPy
(Virtanen et al., 2020) and NetworkX (Hagberg et al., 2008) are three popular Python libraries
we use for many reference solvers in AlgoTune. They contain highly efficient code that has been
developed by thousands of contributors. Given this, it may seem unlikely that significant performance
improvements are possible in these libraries. However, Appendix E presents a sample of merged pull
requests from the past two years in the above repositories. The runtime benchmark results presented
in those pull requests show performance improvements that range from 2.7x speedups, to over 600x
speedups. Even in highly optimized libraries substantial performance headroom remains.
Benchmark construction. To build our benchmark, we recruited 21 contributors, both committers
to the software packages used in AlgoTune, as well as academics who contributed tasks from their
field of expertise. Contributors were asked to submit reference solvers, input data generators and
solution verifiers. Each submitted task was then reviewed by two other contributors. The AlgoTune
test set consists of 154 tasks in 13 categories (see Appendix A for the full list of tasks). This is
comparable to previous benchmarks including HumanEval (Chen et al., 2021), Bamboogle (Press
et al., 2022), and Plot2Code (Wu et al., 2024), which contain 164, 125, and 132 tasks respectively.
Unlike previous benchmarks, where every task instance can either be solved or not, since every
task in AlgoTune can always be further optimized, we believe that our 154 tasks provide a suitable
environment to benchmark LMs. In addition, we provide a development set intended for use in agent
prototyping. Our development set consists of 5 tasks.
3

Implement a solution
verifier to validate
LM-generated code
outputs
2Given a task,
implement an input
generation method
and provide a solver
3 Use AlgoTune’s test
suite to confirm that the
task implementation
is valid.
1
Figure 2: The task collection pipeline for AlgoTune. We define an input generation method and
solver for each task, along with a solution verifier. Automatic tests are then executed to check the
validity of the task’s implementation.
2.2 Task Implementation
Each task in the benchmark comprises of a text file with the task description and an example
input/output pair. In addition, each task includes a Python class which implements the following
three methods:
• generate_problem(n, random_seed): The input generator produces a problem in-
stance parameterized by the problem sizen and a random seed. Generators are expected
to produce problem instances that take longer to solve as n increases (as in Ziogas et al.
(2021)). For example, in QR decomposition the matrix produced bygenerate_problem
is of sizen×n, and in the graph coloring task, 5n is the number of edges in the graph that
is produced.
• solve(problem): The reference solver takes a generated problem instance and computes
its solution. We use this as the performance reference against which speedups are calculated.
Whenever possible, we prefer solvers that are direct wrappers of functions from popular
open-source Python libraries, such as NumPy, SciPy, CVXPY , sk-learn and NetworkX.
• is_solution(problem, proposed_solution): The solution verifier validates an
LM-proposed solution for the given problem instance, returning a boolean value.
We automatically validate each contributed AlgoTune task in two ways. First, we confirm that as the
input sizen grows the solver’s runtime increases. Second, we check that for every task, when picking
a few input samples from the development set, running the solver with different random seeds still
produces outputs accepted by the verifier. We observed this test catching subtle issues in verifiers.
For example, we found that in problems that have multiple valid solutions this test can catch verifiers
that only accept one possible solution.
Table 1 shows an overview of the categories of tasks in AlgoTune and the packages the reference
solvers use. AlgoTune contains a diverse set of tasks covering mathematics, computer science and
physics. For illustrative purposes, we list four example tasks here:
• gzip_compression: Compress data, such that when decompressed it matches the input
data exactly and the compressed data’s size is less than or equal to the size of input data
when compressed with Python’s built-in gzip function.
• chacha_encryption: Encrypt a given plaintext using ChaCha20-Poly1305 with a pro-
vided key, nonce, and optional associated data (AAD).
• graph_isomorphism: Given two isomorphic undirected graphsG1 andG2, find a map-
pingf between their nodes such that adjacency is preserved. Meaning, if nodesu andv are
connected inG1, then nodesf (u) andf (v) must be connected inG2.
• discrete_log: Given a prime numberp, a generatorg, and a valueh, compute the discrete
logarithmx such that:gx≡h (mod p) .
The Importance of the Problem Input Distribution. The hardness of optimizing each task is
dependent not only on the task itself but also on the input data distribution. Therefore, when building
the benchmark, we had to focus not only on finding a wide variety of challenging tasks, but also on
finding an input problem distribution for each task that is representative of real-world, non-trivial
inputs for the solvers. This helps ensure that the LM-synthesized solver is not overly specialized
to a narrow set of problems. For example, in the Lasso task (Tibshirani, 1996), a narrowly-defined
4

Table 1: AlgoTune consists of 154 tasks from 13 categories. This table shows which packages are used in the
reference solvers in each category. Note that a reference solver can use multiple packages.
Category Task Count Top 3 Packages
Used in Reference Solvers Example Task
Matrix Operations 29 numpy (29), scipy (13), ast (1) cholesky_factorization
Convex Optimization 28 numpy (28), cvxpy (23), scipy (2) aircraft_wing_design
Discrete Optimization 19 ortools (13), pysat (4), numpy (4) btsp
Graphs 16 numpy (14), networkx (9), scipy (5) articulation_points
Signal Processing 13 scipy (13), numpy (13) affine_transform_2d
Differential Equation 12 scipy (12), numpy (12) ode_brusselator
Statistics 9 numpy (9), scipy (6), sklearn (4) correlate2d_full_fill
Nonconvex Optimization 6 numpy (6), sklearn (3), hdbscan (1) clustering_outliers
Numerical Methods 6 numpy (6), scipy (4) cumulative_simpson_1d
Cryptography 5 cryptography (3), hmac (3), sympy (2) aes_gcm_encryption
Computational Geometry 4 numpy (4), scipy (3), faiss (1) convex_hull
Control 4 numpy (4), cvxpy (2), scipy (2) feedback_controller_design
Misc. 3 numpy (3), hmac (1), mpmath (1) base64_encoding
data distribution could lead to the optimal regressor to always being the same (for example, with
a slope of 1), and the LM-synthesized solver could exploit this by hard-coding the solution to that
value rather than solving the problem from scratch.
The Importance of Writing Complete Tests. During development of the AlgoTune infrastructure,
we found that sometimes an LM would find what appeared to be substantially more efficient code
for a certain task, but upon manual inspection it would turn out to be a solution that passed our tests
by finding a loophole and without actually solving the given task. This is analogous to the reward
hacking phenomenon observed in reinforcement learning (Amodei et al., 2016). For example, in an
initial version of our vector quantization solution verifier, we only tested whether the quantization
was valid, but did not check whether the quantization error was optimal. This led to an LM generating
a fast, trivial, and suboptimal quantization. We fixed this by adding an optimality test in the solution
verifier.
Do the AlgoTune reference functions have to have “optimal” runtime? Benchmarks play a few
roles in the current research landscape, including 1) allowing for comparison between different LMs
and 2) tracking the progress of the field over time. Both of these are possible with AlgoTune, even if
the reference solvers for each task are not “optimal”. Since new algorithmic and coding innovations
are published constantly, it would be unmanageable to try and maintain a library of 154 solvers that
are all state-of-the-art in their domain, both in terms of using the best-known algorithm and in terms of
implementing that algorithm in the lowest-level and most efficient way (using Numba or C bindings
for Python with Cython). Therefore, we prioritize correctness in our reference implementations,
which leads us to source the reference solvers from widely-used Python libraries.
2.3 Evaluation Protocol
Agents are allowed to browse online resources while developing code for the tasks in AlgoTune.
Agents are also allowed to execute code, and iterate freely on the provided development set of inputs
for each task (which, of course, is different from the test inputs that we use to determine the final
speedup score on each task). We also allow agents to write code that requires compilation, and
we exclude the compilation time from runtime timing measurements (we allow up to 2 minutes of
compilation time per task).
Evaluation. For each task, we pick a problem sizen such that the task takes our reference solver
100ms to solve on one CPU core, similar to the setup in Ziogas et al. (2021). As in Ziogas et al.,
due to memory constraints, for a few tasks we use a lower time target (Appendix H reports timing
information for each task). To compute a model’s score on a given task, we first run its generated
code on the test input instances. If the task verifier deems all outputs valid, we assign the model a
speedup score: the ratio between reference code runtime and LM code runtime over the test inputs.
Solutions that yield invalid outputs or that have a speedup of under 1× are assigned a speedup of 1×.
The overall AlgoTune score for a specific model is the harmonic mean of its scores on all tasks. We
5

use the harmonic mean since it is appropriate for averaging speed-up ratios (Smith, 1988; Eeckhout,
2024).
To reliably measure runtime, we do the following in each candidate solver’s evaluation: for each
problem instance, we first run an untimed warmup run, as is common practice in code benchmark-
ing (Georges et al., 2007; Blackburn et al., 2008). This is then followed by one timed measurement.
This is repeated 10 times, of which only the minimum time is kept (Arnold et al., 2000). Timing for
each run is captured usingtime.perf_counter_ns. We run all measurements on an AMD EPYC
9454 CPU with 14GB of memory.
We note that the choice of problem sizen can result in different optimal algorithms, as is the case in
matrix multiplication (Smirnov, 2013). Due to budget constraints, we pick a specific problem size for
each task, but we emphasize that AlgoTune can operate on arbitrary problem sizes.
3 The AlgoTuner Agent
In order to evaluate the frontier LMs on our benchmark, we adopt a SWE-Agent like setup (Yang
et al., 2024) wherein the model interacts with a computer environment to iteratively edit code and
receive feedback while attempting to optimize an AlgoTune solver.
To get feedback on the current solver performance, we allow the agent to run its code on a development
set of inputs for the task, after which we send back timing information and statistics regarding how
many instances were solved correctly or timed out. We evaluate all LMs with a fixed budget of $1 for
each task. The agent continuously queries the LM to improve its solution until the budget runs out, at
which point we submit its best code (as judged by its runtime on the development examples). The
score we assign the agent is its speedup over the reference implementation on a held-out test set of
inputs for the given task. If this computation results in a score that is less than 1, we assign the agent
a mercy score of 1.
In addition to the packages used in the reference solvers, AlgoTuner can also use a variety of Python
packages, including: Cython (Behnel et al., 2011), Numba (Lam et al., 2015), and Dask (Rocklin,
2015). For a complete list of packages available to the agent, see Appendix D.
We also implement commands for the agent that are specific to code optimization:profile allows
the agent to use a profiler to see which parts of the code take the most time, and reference runs
the reference solver on a given input and reports back the output and runtime. See Appendix B for
further details of the agent setup, prompt, and commands.
4 Results
We run AlgoTuner using four frontier LMs through the LiteLLM library (BerriAI, 2025):
o4-mini-high (OpenAI, 2025),Claude Opus 4 20250514 (Anthropic, 2025b),Gemini 2.5
Pro (Google DeepMind, 2025), and DeepSeek R1 0528 (Guo et al., 2025). In all cases where
applicable, the highest thinking setting was used. We present our results in Table 2, showing that
models are able to optimize our reference solvers somewhat, with o4-mini achieving an AlgoTune
score of 1.72×, which is the harmonic mean of its speedup ratios across all tasks, with tasks for which
the model cannot find a quicker solver given a speedup of 1×. Our analysis shows that these speedups
are mostly surface level, simple optimizations, and do not represent any algorithmic innovations.
Table 2: AlgoTuner scores for each LM, with a budget of $1 for each task. Speedup is calculated as
the harmonic mean of the speedups across tasks.
o4-mini R1 Gemini 2.5 Pro Claude Opus 4
AlgoTune Score 1.72× 1.70× 1.51× 1.33×
4.1 Quantitative Analysis
Figure 3 shows how agent-generated code scores on AlgoTune (on the development set of input
problems) at intermediate budget checkpoints. Both o4-mini-high and R1 achieve better scores after
6

$0.2 $0.4 $0.6 $0.8 $1.0
Budget
1.2
1.4
1.6
1.8AlgoTune Score
o4-mini
R1
Claude Opus 4
Gemini 2.5 Pro
Figure 3: AlgoTune scores (on the development
set of input problems) across all tasks, during the
running of AlgoTuner, for intermediate budget
splits, up to the total budget of $1.
Table 3: The top packages added or removed by
o4-mini’s optimized solvers (compared to those
used by the reference solvers), across all 92 tasks
it sped up, ranked by absolute change.
Package Reference LM
Generated ∆
numba 1 25 +24
scipy 61 67 +6
ecos 0 2 +2
faiss 2 4 +2
pysat 4 1 -3
hmac 4 0 -4
sklearn 9 5 -4
networkx 12 2 -10
numpy 132 118 -14
cvxpy 27 10 -17
spending $0.1, than Claude Opus 4 and Gemini 2.5 Pro achieve after spending the full budget. In
Table 3, we show packages used by o4-mini-high on the 59.7% of tasks where it managed to get a
speedup of at least 1.1×, and how those packages differ from the packages used by the reference
solvers. We can see that it frequently used Numba to write efficient solvers, and that it frequently
rewrote solvers that used NetworkX, CVXPY and OR-Tools to remove those dependencies. For
additional quantitative analysis, see §C.
4.2 Qualitative Analysis
Manually reviewing AlgoTuner’s synthesized solvers shows that its optimizations are mostly surface-
level. We go over a few of the different optimization patterns used by AlgoTuner below:
Using a Better Implementation. In several tasks, AlgoTuner replaces the refer-
ence implementation with a call to a specialized, more efficient function. For ex-
ample, in feedback_controller_design, instead of using CVXPY , a call to
scipy.linalg.solve_discrete_are is made (see Fig. 4), and in the lyapunov_stability
task, instead of CVXPY the optimized code callsscipy.linalg.solve_discrete_lyapunov.
Better Library Usage. In several tasks, the default usage of a library (e.g., operations or parameters
of a function call) are swapped for more optimized ones in the optimized code. This is done without
significantly changing the algorithmic structure of the solution. In psd_cone_projection, the
optimized code uses the same level of abstraction as the reference, but with more efficient usage of
NumPy (see Fig. 5).
Rewriting Using Low-Level Operations. Ingraph_isomorphism, instead of using NetworkX
objects, AlgoTuner’s code works on adjacency lists and runs a single Weisfeiler–Lehman (Sher-
vashidze et al., 2011) pass, resulting in far fewer recursive calls than the NetworkX implementation.
This results in a 52x speedup. In communicability, AlgoTuner’s solver uses BLAS operations
instead of pure Python, which leads to a speedup of more than 142x. In ode_hodgkinhuxley,
AlgoTuner’s code uses a Numba kernel instead of the reference’s SciPy call, achieving a 112x
speedup. In another case, the reference solution uses SciPy’s stats.wasserstein_distance,
which incurs Python overhead and extra work each call; AlgoTuner’s code compiles a Numba kernel
that streams once over the data, so after a one-time JIT compilation it runs at near-C speed, leading to
a speedup of more than 4x (see Fig. 6).
Failure Analysis. We next present a few examples of AlgoTuner failing to optimize code.
In the svm task, our reference solver formulates the SVM as a convex program and then solves it
using CVXPY . AlgoTuner with o4-mini, Claude Opus 4, and R1 reach the same implementation,
7

import cvxpy as cp
def solve(A, B):
n, m = A.shape[0], B.shape[1]
Q = cp.Variable((n, n), symmetric=
True)
L = cp.Variable((m, n))
cons = [
cp.bmat([
[Q, Q @ A.T + L.T @ B.T],
[A @ Q + B @ L, Q]
]) >> np.eye(2 * n),
Q >> np.eye(n),
]
obj = cp.Minimize(0)
prob = cp.Problem(obj, cons)
prob.solve()
K = L.value @ np.linalg.inv(Q.value)
P = np.linalg.inv(Q.value)
return P, K
from scipy.linalg import
solve_discrete_are
def solve(A, B):
n, m = A.shape[0], B.shape[1]
Q = np.eye(n)
R = np.eye(m)
P = solve_discrete_are(A, B, Q, R)
PB = P.dot(B)
S = R + PB.T.dot(B)
N = PB.T.dot(A)
K = -np.linalg.solve(S, N)
return P, K
Figure 4: Left: Our feedback controller task starts with a reference CVXPY implementation solving
an SDP formulation. Right: AlgoTuner with o4-mini improves upon the runtime by a factor of 81 by
rewriting it to use SciPy’s discrete algebraic Ricatti equation (DARE) solver.
def solve(A):
eigvals, eigvecs = np.linalg.eig(A)
eigvals = np.maximum(eigvals, 0)
E = np.diag(eigvals)
X = eigvecs @ E @ eigvecs.T
return X
def solve(A):
eigvals, eigvecs = np.linalg.eigh(A
)
eigvals[eigvals < 0] = 0
X = (eigvecs * eigvals) @ eigvecs.T
return X
Figure 5: Left: Our original code for a PSD cone projection of a symmetric matrix projects the
eigenvalues to be non-negative. Right: AlgoTuner with Claude Opus 4 improves the code by a factor
of 8 by 1) using a symmetric eigendecomposition, and 2) not forming the eigenvalue matrix and
instead applying them directly to the eigenvectors.
which results in no speedup. Gemini 2.5 Pro is not able to come up with a solver that produces valid
results for every test instance.
In thelasso task, our reference solver uses scikit-learn’s optimizedlinear_model.Lasso, while
AlgoTuner with Claude Opus 4 wrote a Lasso regressor using pure Python and Numba. This resulted
in code that ran at 0.33x the time of the reference solver, and the agent was unable to improve on this
due to reaching the budget limit.
5 Related Work
Program synthesis, the automatic generation of programs subject to input constraints, is a long-
standing problem in computer science and has been previously referred to as a “holy grail” of the
field (Gulwani et al., 2017). Predating modern language models, a variety of approaches have been
applied to the problem including constraint satisfaction (Torlak and Bodík, 2013; Solar-Lezama,
2008), statistical methods (Raychev et al., 2014), and enumerative search (Alur et al., 2015). We
especially note that Massalin (1987) introduced the concept of “superoptimization,” the problem of
finding the fastest possible compilation of source program to a target language. We direct readers
to Gulwani et al. (2017); David and Kroening (2017) for a general survey and Allamanis et al. (2018)
for machine learning methods specifically.
Recent benchmarks challenge LMs in real-world problem solving, from fixing software bugs to
answering medical questions (Jimenez et al., 2024; Arora et al., 2025). Prior work using LMs for
code generation has focused on challenging the LMs to program specific functions, measuring only
correctness but not speed (Chen et al., 2021; Nijkamp et al., 2022; Li et al., 2022; Fried et al., 2022;
8

from scipy.stats import
wasserstein_distance
def solve(u, v):
domain = list(range(1, u.shape[0]+1))
return wasserstein_distance(
domain, domain, u, v)
@numba.njit(cache=True, fastmath=True)
def wass(u,v):
cumulative_diff, total_distance =
0.0, 0.0
for i in range(n - 1):
cumulative_diff += u[i] - v[i]
total_distance += abs(
cumulative_diff)
return total_distance
def solve(u, v):
return wass(u, v)
Figure 6: Left: Our reference implementation for the 1D Wasserstein task calls into SciPy’s function.
Right: AlgoTuner with Gemini 2.5 Pro improves the performance by a factor of 4 by writing Numba-
jitted code for the difference between the CDFs of the distributions.
Cassano et al., 2023; Li et al., 2023; Liu et al., 2023; Tian et al., 2024; Jiang et al., 2024). In AlgoTune
we check for correctness but score models based on the speed of their generated code.
Recent works (Shypula et al., 2023; Qiu et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024; Coignion et al., 2024;
Waghjale et al., 2024; Du et al., 2024) have proposed benchmarks that challenge LMs to make
LeetCode and coding competition-style code more efficient. However, the tasks in AlgoTune provide
a wider and more realistic range of optimization challenges. In the future, optimizations found on
AlgoTune could directly lead to functions in popular open source projects such as Numpy, SciPy and
NetworkX becoming faster.
Misra (2024) showed that current state-of-the-art LMs struggle to optimize code, echoing findings
from (Qiu et al., 2024; Huang et al., 2024). Concurrently with our work, Ouyang et al. (2025) task
LMs with optimizing GPU kernel code for neural networks. AlgoTune contains tasks in many varied
domains and does not just focus on deep learning functions. Other concurrent works, including Fan
et al. (2023); Romera-Paredes et al. (2024); Imajuku et al. (2025); Chen et al. (2025); Sun et al.
(2025); Novikov et al. (2025); Tang et al. (2025) present benchmarks and AI systems that optimize
the solution quality of problems in computer science and math (for example, finding the shortest
traveling salesman path in a graph). In AlgoTune, we instead focus on making functions run faster
while meeting a solution quality threshold. AlgoTune also consists of a wider variety of problems,
including popular algorithms that have not been previously used in benchmarks, such as those for
encryption (AES GSM, ChaCha), compression (gzip) and hashing (SHA-256). A final concurrent
work, Shetty et al. (2025), challenges LMs to optimize the runtime of functions in popular Python
repositories including NumPy, pandas and Pydantic. Our approach complements their work since
we focus on implementing end-to-end algorithms from a wide variety of domains, whereas their
benchmark focuses on isolated functions from machine learning, data science and image processing
repositories.
In addition to being used to directly write efficient code, LMs are also being used to reduce compiled
code size (Italiano and Cummins, 2024), and in general to make compilers more efficient (Cummins
et al., 2024a;b). This provides an orthogonal approach, which in the future could be combined with
AlgoTuner-style optimizations to lead to further speedups.
Agents also struggle in tasks outside the code debugging and efficiency domains. ScienceAgent-
Bench (Chen et al., 2024) showed that agents struggle with data-analysis and simulation challenges.
ML engineering benchmarks like ML-Dev-Bench (Padigela et al., 2025) and MLE-bench (Chan et al.,
2024) demonstrate that agents struggle with complex debugging and creative model improvements,
rarely matching expert performance.
6 Limitations and Future Work
Our benchmark consists of algorithmic tasks that have well-defined solvers, input data generators, and
solution verifiers, which must be written and checked manually. Future work could enable optimizing
systems for which data generators and verifiers are hard or impossible to write, such as a web server
or an operating system.
9

As mentioned in §2, we verify solutions on a fixed set of test inputs. Shortcomings in the test input
distribution or in verifier completeness leave open the possibility for incorrect LM-synthesized code
that passes tests. Future work could use formal verification to better verify LM-synthesized code, but
this introduces constraints on programming language applicability and in some cases may require
proof construction. In our experience, manual inspection of LM-generated code was sufficient to
identify such potential issues.
7 Conclusion
AlgoTune introduces a benchmark where LMs are tasked with optimizing code in a wide range of
domains. Along with a comprehensive benchmark suite consisting of 154 tasks, AlgoTune provides
infrastructure for verifying and timing LM-generated candidate solutions, which makes arbitrary
numerical function optimization streamlined and easy to deploy.
We showed that our AlgoTuner agent can frequently optimize the functions in AlgoTune. Paired
with four frontier LMs, AlgoTuner is able to provide surface level optimizations but is not able to
come up with novel algorithms. Future work could deploy AlgoTune on other platforms, including
GPUs/TPUs and distributed systems, with only minimal code changes. We hope that our work leads
to LM systems that enable development of highly efficient code in a wide variety of domains, leading
to scientific progress.
Acknowledgments
We thank David Alvarez-Melis and Matthias Kümmerer for their valuable feedback and fruitful
discussions. Meta was involved only in an advisory role. All experimentation and data processing,
including the use of open source models and datasets, was conducted at the University of Tübingen
and Princeton University. The authors acknowledge support by the state of Baden-Württemberg
through bwHPC. The authors thank the International Max Planck Research School for Intelligent
Systems (IMPRS-IS) for supporting Ori Press and Nathanael Bosch. MB is a member of the Machine
Learning Cluster of Excellence, funded by the Deutsche Forschungsgemeinschaft (DFG, German
Research Foundation) under Germany’s Excellence Strategy – EXC number 2064/1 – Project number
390727645 and acknowledges support by the German Research Foundation (DFG): SFB 1233, Robust
Vision: Inference Principles and Neural Mechanisms, TP 4, Project No: 276693517. He further
acknowledges financial support from Open Philanthropy Foundation funded by the Good Ventures
Foundation. This work was supported by the Tübingen AI Center.
