record_id: s2_snowball:b38ba9b092929caff45ca60c01b0c0336926eb75
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2603.20986
fetched_title: AutoMOOSE: An Agentic AI for Autonomous Phase-Field Simulation
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:04Z

AutoMOOSE: An Agentic AI for Autonomous Phase-Field
Simulation
Sukriti Manna1,2,∗ Henry Chan2 Subramanian K. R. S. Sankaranarayanan1,2,∗
1Department of Mechanical and Industrial Engineering, University of Illinois Chicago, Chicago, IL 60607, USA
2Center for Nanoscale Materials, Argonne National Laboratory, Lemont, IL 60439, USA
∗Correspondence:smanna@anl.gov,skrssank@anl.gov
Abstract
Phase-field modeling links thermodynamics and kinetics to microstructural evolution, but using
multiphysics frameworks such as MOOSE requires substantial expertise to construct valid inputs,
manage simulation campaigns, diagnose failures, and validate results. We introduceAutoMOOSE,
an open-source multi-agent framework that orchestrates the complete simulation lifecycle from a
single natural-language prompt. Six specialized agents — Architect, Input Writer, Runner, Reviewer,
Visualization agent, and a physics-grounded Skeptic — generate, execute, analyze, and adversarially
test simulations against conservation laws, asymptotic limits, and scaling relations. We validate
AutoMOOSE in two distinct phase-field domains: non-conserved copper grain growth governed by
Allen–Cahn dynamics and conserved Fe–Cr spinodal decomposition governed by Cahn–Hilliard
dynamics. On a prospectively specified 25-task grain-growth benchmark spanning temperature, grain
count, resolution, and model formulation, AutoMOOSE generates syntactically valid inputs for all
25 tasks, produces completed simulations with measurable coarsening in 19, and delivers 15 results
that satisfy Burke–Turnbull kinetics (R2≥0.90 ) and survive Skeptic falsification. The unsuccessful
cases are traced to two identifiable generator defects. An ensemble of 1000 simulations recovers
the prescribed activation energy to within 1% after finite-size extrapolation (Q∞ = 0.228 eV versus
0.230 eV). In the conserved domain, an agent-generated, CALPHAD-based Fe–Cr simulation limits
relative mass drift to 6.3×10 −6, dissipates free energy to a stable plateau, and evolves toward
the equilibrium tie-line. Controlled ablations show that the full pipeline converts stochastic raw
generation — 3–7 successful tasks out of 8 across repeated trials — into consistent success of 8
out of 8. AutoMOOSE therefore provides a practical route from natural-language specification to
reproducible, physics-validated phase-field simulation campaigns.
Keywords:agentic AI · large language models · multiphysics simulation · phase-field modeling · physics-based
verification · scientific workflow automation
1 Introduction
Microstructure governs the properties of structural and functional materials: grain size controls yield strength and creep
resistance in metallic alloys, domain topology determines the switching efficiency of ferroelectrics, and precipitate
morphology sets the coarsening kinetics of superalloys [1–3]. Because microstructure emerges from processing his-
tory, predicting its evolution is central to materials discovery and design. Phase-field methods provide precisely this
predictive capability — a thermodynamically consistent framework for modeling grain growth, spinodal decompo-
sition, solidification, and ferroelectric domain dynamics — and have become a widely used approach to mesoscale
microstructure simulation [4, 5]. Among the platforms that have made these methods accessible at scale, the Multi-
physics Object-Oriented Simulation Environment (MOOSE) provides a modular finite-element architecture, scalability
from workstations to leadership-class high-performance computing (HPC) systems, and a broad, active community of
materials scientists and engineers [6, 7].
Yet the power of these frameworks comes at a steep practical price: translating a scientific objective into an executable
phase-field model demands simultaneous expertise in thermodynamics, kinetic equations, numerical discretization,
arXiv:2603.20986v2 [cs.AI] 7 Aug 2026

nonlinear solvers, and platform-specific input syntax [ 6, 8]. Even a standard grain-growth simulation in MOOSE
requires tightly coupled specifications for meshing, order-parameter initialization, free-energy and evolution kernels,
boundary conditions, solver controls, and adaptive time integration, often exceeding one hundred lines of interdependent
syntax [5, 9]. An error in any one of these components can produce an input-parsing failure, solver divergence,
or — most insidiously — a numerically completed simulation that violates the intended physics. This last failure
mode connects the expertise barrier to a deeper reproducibility problem: differences in spatial resolution, solver
tolerances, initial conditions, or undocumented parameter choices can alter quantitative results without any visible sign
of error [10, 11], and the absence of structured workflows impedes the systematic generation of simulation datasets
needed to build processing–microstructure–property databases [2].
These barriers are not unique to the mesoscale, and agentic AI systems have recently begun to dismantle their
counterparts at other scales of materials modeling. At the atomistic scale, large language model (LLM)-driven
agents have been applied to interatomic-potential development, automated density-functional-theory workflows, and
autonomous molecular design [12–14]; at the continuum scale, emerging systems have explored agent-assisted finite-
element meshing and topology optimization [ 15, 16]. Underpinning both is a broader body of work showing that
tool-using agents can decompose natural-language objectives, generate executable artifacts, inspect intermediate outputs,
and revise their actions using external feedback [17–20] — capabilities that map directly onto the workflow friction
described above. Mesoscale phase-field modeling, however — despite sitting at the intersection of thermodynamic
theory, numerical methods, and processing-scale phenomena — has received comparatively little attention from such
systems. Nor would input generation alone close the gap: a plausible input file does not establish that a simulation
implements the requested physics, completes successfully, or produces physically admissible results. The unresolved
challenge is therefore not whether an LLM can draft a phase-field input, but whether agentic scaffolding can convert
stochastic model output into reproducible simulations whose physical validity is quantitatively tested.
Here we introduceAutoMOOSE, an open-source agentic framework built to meet exactly this challenge: it orchestrates
the full MOOSE simulation lifecycle — from natural-language prompt to physics-tested result — through a six-agent
pipeline of Architect, Input Writer, Runner, Reviewer, Visualization agent, and a physics-grounded Skeptic, running on
a model-agnostic language-model backend (Section 2.1). Along this pipeline, the agents parse user intent, generate
validated MOOSE input files, execute parallel parameter sweeps, and screen runs for successful execution; the Skeptic
then — critically — adversarially tests each completed result against conservation laws, asymptotic limits, and scaling
relations, classifying it as credible only if it survives falsification. This scientific core is wrapped in an extensible
engineering shell: a modular plugin architecture separates physics-specific logic from the orchestration layer, so new
phase-field formulations can be added without modifying shared infrastructure, while a Model Context Protocol (MCP)
server [21] exposes the complete workflow as ten structured tools for integration with MCP-compatible clients and
composability with external optimization pipelines. Finally, every run produces a self-documenting directory recording
inputs, outputs, execution metadata, and validation decisions — structured provenance that supports reproducibility and
alignment with FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, Reusable) data principles [11].
To test whether this architecture delivers on the challenge, we validate AutoMOOSE in two phase-field domains with
complementary physics: non-conserved copper grain growth governed by Allen–Cahn dynamics and conserved Fe–Cr
spinodal decomposition governed by Cahn–Hilliard dynamics. In the first domain, on a prospectively specified 25-task
grain-growth benchmark with machine-checkable success gates, AutoMOOSE generates syntactically valid inputs for
all 25 tasks, produces completed simulations with measurable coarsening in 19, and delivers 15 fully credible results —
those satisfying all pre-specified physical-validity criteria and surviving Skeptic falsification (Section 3) — with the
unsuccessful cases traced to two identifiable generator defects. Scaling beyond the benchmark, an ensemble campaign
of 1000 simulations recovers the prescribed activation energy to within 1% after finite-size extrapolation. In the second
domain, an agent-generated Cahn–Hilliard simulation exhibits a relative mass drift of6.3×10−6, monotonic free-energy
dissipation, and evolution toward the equilibrium tie-line. Finally, a controlled ablation isolates the contribution of the
scaffolding itself: raw single-model generation succeeds on only 3–7 of 8 tasks across repeated trials, whereas the full
pipeline succeeds on all 8 in every trial — direct evidence that the agentic layer, not the underlying model alone, is
what renders the workflow reproducible.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows. Section 2.1 describes the AutoMOOSE software design, including
the phase-field models, the six-agent pipeline, the plugin architecture, and the benchmark specification. Section 3
presents validation results across both physics domains, the ensemble campaign, the ablation study, and Skeptic
falsification as methodology. Sections 4 and 5 discuss limitations, future directions, and an outlook on agentic AI for
computational materials science.
2

2 Computational Methods and Software Design
2.1 Phase-Field Model for Grain Growth
Phase-field models represent discrete crystallographic orientations as continuous order parameters, so that grain
boundary migration emerges from free-energy minimization rather than explicit interface tracking — circumventing
the topological challenges of sharp-interface methods while capturing curvature-driven coarsening, Zener pinning,
solute drag [3, 22], and the many-grain topology changes of microstructure evolution. Among these formulations,
AutoMOOSE is demonstrated on the multiphase Allen–Cahn model of Moelanset al.[ 5], which serves as the
representative physics throughout Sections 2.2–2.7. This first demonstration targets non-conserved dynamics, in which
the order parameters evolve to minimize free energy without a conservation constraint; the extension to conserved
Cahn–Hilliard dynamics — Fe–Cr spinodal decomposition, where composition is a conserved field — follows in
Section 2.10. We establish the model here because the agent pipeline translates each physical quantity introduced
below directly into a MOOSE input construct, and the closing consistency check of this section becomes the pipeline’s
end-to-end validation target.
In the Moelans formulation, each graini is represented by an order parameterηi (i= 1,...,N op) equal to unity inside
the grain and zero elsewhere, with boundaries identified by the overlap of neighboring order parameters. Each ηi
evolves by the Allen–Cahn equation,
∂ηi
∂t =−L(T) δF
δηi
,(1)
whereL(T)is the temperature-dependent kinetic coefficient andFthe total free energy,
F=
Z
V

floc(η) + κ
2
NopX
i=1
|∇ηi|2

dV,(2)
with the local free energy density in the Moelans form [5],
floc =µ

X
i
η4
i
4 − η2
i
2

+γ
X
i
X
j>i
η2
i η2
j + 1
4

,(3)
whereµ is the free energy weight andγ= 1.5 enforces symmetric interfacial profiles. Together, these terms encode the
physics of coarsening: the double wells stabilize bulk grain regions (ηi∈{0,1} ), the cross-coupling term penalizes
overlap between neighboring order parameters, and the ratio of gradient to local energy sets the diffuse interface width
wGB, which the computational mesh must resolve (h≤w GB/4).
The model coefficients{L,µ,κ} appearing in these equations are not directly measurable; assuming isotropic grain
boundary properties, they map onto three quantities that are — grain boundary energy σ, interface widthwGB, and
mobilityM GB — through [5]
L= 4M GB
3w GB
, µ= 6σ
wGB
, κ= 3
4σw GB.(4)
This mapping is central to AutoMOOSE: the user specifies{σ,w GB,M GB}, and the Input Writer agent (f2) computes
{L,µ,κ} analytically via Eq. (4), eliminating a common source of error in hand-authored inputs (Section 2.4).
Temperature enters the model through the mobility, which carries an Arrhenius dependence,
MGB(T) =M 0 exp

− Q
kBT

,(5)
with pre-exponential mobilityM0, activation energyQ, and Boltzmann constantkB; through Eq. (4),L(T) inherits the
same dependence.
This Arrhenius input has a directly observable consequence in the coarsening kinetics, quantified through the grain
countN(t) tracked by the MOOSE GrainTracker algorithm. In two dimensions, the grain coarsening law [23] gives
1
N(t)− 1
N0
= ˜k(T)t,(6)
whereN0 =N(0) and the rate constant ˜k(T) is extracted from the slope of N−1(t) againstt. Because ˜k(T)∝
MGB(T), it follows the same Arrhenius form,
˜k(T) = ˜k0 exp

− Q
kBT

,(7)
3

User
Prompt
natural
language
Cognitive layer
f2.Input writer
Writes validated
MOOSE .i file
Meshing
Materials
VariablesPostprocessors
Kernels
Executioners
Execution layer
f3. Runner
Launches
MOOSE;
streams
solver log
f4. Reviewer
Checks run
completion
Recovery
Module
Bounded parameter
correction; timestep;
mesh; integration window
Solver
failer
Result
2
3
Epistemic
layer
f6. Skeptic
Tests physics
invariants;
credible or
falsified
credible
6
f5.
Visualization
Coarsening
kinetics;
Arrhenius fit
5
4
Forward path
Credible results
Recovery loop
a
b
c d
e
f
f1.
Architect
structures
simulation
plan
1
Falsified
Regenerate
via f2
Figure 1:AutoMOOSE agentic pipeline.Six model-agnostic language-model agents ( f1–f6), organized into a
cognitive, an execution, and an epistemic layer, transform a natural-language prompt into a completed and physics-
tested MOOSE phase-field simulation. In thecognitive layer, theArchitect( f1) parses the user prompt into the
structured simulation planP (Eq. (9)), encoding the physics model, mesh geometry, solver tolerances, and sweep
parameters; theInput Writer( f2), a compound agent, then coordinates six sub-agents in strict dependency order
— (a) Meshing, (b) Variables, (c) Kernels, (d) Materials, (e) Postprocessors, and (f) Executioner — to render a
validated MOOSE .i input file via the plugin registry (Section 2.9). In theexecution layer, theRunner( f3) launches
MOOSE and streams the solver log; theReviewer( f4) screens each run for completion, distinguishing genuine
solver breakdown from transient adaptive-timestep events (Section 2.6); and theVisualizationagent ( f5) extracts the
coarsening kinetics and performs the Arrhenius analysis from CSV postprocessor output (Section 2.7). In theepistemic
layer, theSkeptic( f6) adversarially tests each completed run against falsifiable physics invariants and classifies it as
credible or falsified (Section 2.8); only credible runs enter campaign-level analysis. Recovery is triggered on two paths:
a run that fails to complete is diagnosed from its solver-log signatures, and a completed run falsified for a correctable
cause is diagnosed from the Skeptic’s verdict; either routes to the recovery module, which applies a bounded, logged
correction (timestep, mesh, or integration window; at most three attempts) and re-enters the pipeline at the Input Writer
(Section 3.7). Black arrows: forward path; green arrows: credible results; red arrows: recovery loop.
so the activation energy governing the microscopic mobility in Eq.(5) reappears as the slope of a macroscopic Arrhenius
plot. SinceQ is a user-specified input, the value recovered by fitting Eq. (7) to a simulated temperature sweep must
match it — the closed-loop consistency check anticipated above, exercised in Section 3.6.
2.2 Overview of Agentic Workflow
Building on the phase-field model established in Section 2.1, AutoMOOSE realizes the simulation workflow through a
modular, agent-based orchestration framework that operates entirely at the workflow layer — interpreting user intent,
constructing MOOSE inputs that encode Eqs. (1)–(4), managing execution, monitoring for failures, and extracting
quantitative results — without requiring the user to write a single line of MOOSE syntax. Six specialized large language
model agents implement this pipeline (Fig. 1), each carrying a physics-aware system prompt reproduced in full in
Supplementary Section S1. The agents themselves are model-agnostic: they are routed through a provider-independent
client, and the results reported here use Claude Opus 4.8 and Claude Sonnet 4.6, with a self-hosted open-weights model
also verified end-to-end (Table 1) [21].
What the agents exchange, and in what order, admits a compact formal description: the pipeline is a sequential
composition of agent functions,
S=f 6◦f 5◦f 4◦f 3◦f 2◦f 1(U),(8)
4

Table 1: AutoMOOSE runs on interchangeable backends. The same agent pipeline drives a grain-growth task end-to-end
under both a closed-weights frontier model and a self-hosted open-weights model; switching backends requires only a
configuration change, so the framework does not depend on any single provider’s availability.
Backend Weights Hosting Pipeline (end-to-end)
Claude Sonnet 4.6 Closed Provider API completes
Qwen2.5-32B-Instruct Open Self-hosted (Perlmutter, vLLM, 4×A100) completes
whereU denotes the natural-language user intent and each agent fi :P i−1→P i progressively enriches a shared
simulation plan,
P=

Ω, h,M,B,θ solver,θ run,O

,(9)
encoding the domain Ω, mesh spacing h, physical modelM (which stores the measurable set {σ,w GB,M GB} of
Section 2.1), boundary conditionsB, solver tolerances θsolver, runtime parameters θrun, and requested outputsO. The
plan is thus the single shared state object of the pipeline: eachfi reads the fields it requires, writes the fields it produces,
and hands the enriched plan to the next stage, so no inter-agent messaging is needed beyond this structured handoff
(managed by the FastAPI backend [24]).
Reading Eq. (8) left to right, the six agents group naturally into three functional layers, indicated by the colored
frames in Fig. 1. Thecognitive layer(Architect f1, Input Writerf2) interprets user intent and constructs a validated
MOOSE input file encoding Eqs. (1)–(4). Theexecution layer(Runner f3, Reviewerf4, Visualizationf5) manages
simulation execution, screens each run for successful completion, and extracts the kinetic observablesN(t) and ˜k(T)
of Eqs. (6)–(7). Theepistemic layer(Skeptic f6) adversarially tests each completed run against the physical laws it
must satisfy, classifying it as credible only if it survives falsification (Section 2.8). This separation of concerns serves
the pipeline at both ends: input-construction errors are caught in the cognitive layer before they propagate into costly
simulation runs, and the credibility verdict is kept independent of the machinery that produced the result.
These layers come together when a task traverses the pipeline (Fig. 1). The Architect (f1) parses the user prompt into
the simulation planP, from which the Input Writer (f2) — a compound agent coordinating six sub-agents in strict
dependency order — renders a validated MOOSE .i input file. The Runner (f3) launches MOOSE, streams the solver
log, and records whether the run reaches its target integration time; the Reviewer (f4), a completion-aware execution
screen, then determines whether the run executed successfully, distinguishing genuine solver breakdown from transient
adaptive-timestep events that recover and complete. For every completed run, the Visualization agent (f5) extracts
the coarsening kinetics and performs the Arrhenius analysis, and the Skeptic (f6) independently subjects the result
to falsification against its physical invariants. Only runs that both complete execution and survive falsification enter
campaign-level analysis; this verification arc operates without user intervention and is detailed in Sections 2.6 and 2.8.
With the workflow now in view end to end, the following subsections examine each agent in turn (Sections 2.3–2.7),
followed by the plugin architecture that makes the framework physics-agnostic (Section 2.9) and the Model Context
Protocol interface that enables headless operation (Section 2.11).
2.3 Architect Agent
The Architect agentf1 is the entry point of the pipeline, receiving the raw natural-language user intentU and producing
a fully resolved simulation planP (Eq. (9)) as a structured JSON object. It is called once per user request and its output
is passed directly to the Input Writerf 2.
f1 is responsible for five parsing tasks: identifying the physics formulation (GBEvolution or LinearizedInterface),
the spatial dimension (2D QUAD4 or 3D HEX8), the boundary conditions (periodic or Dirichlet), the sweep intent
(detecting whether the user specifies multiple values for any sweepable parameter such asT , grain_num, orQ, and
extracting the corresponding sweep range Θ), and the solver strategy (adaptive timestepping and AMR on or off). These
five items map directly onto the components ofP: task 1 populatesM; tasks 2–3 populate Ω andB; task 4 populates
θr withΘ; task 5 populatesθ s.
A strict JSON-only output constraint is enforced in the system prompt: the FastAPI backend parses the re-
sponse with json.loads() and raises a structured error on any prose, preventing silent propagation of am-
biguous plans to f2. When the requested physics is not supported by any registered plugin, f1 returns
{"formulation":"stub","error":"unsupported_physics"}, which the backend surfaces to the user with a
list of available plugins rather than attempting input generation. The complete system prompt for f1 is reproduced
verbatim in Supplementary Section S1.1.
5

2.4 Input Writer Agent
The Input Writer agentf2 receives the simulation planP from the Architect and produces a complete, syntax-validated
MOOSE .i input file. Rather than delegating this task to a single monolithic prompt,f2 is implemented as a compound
agent (Fig. 1) that coordinates six sequential sub-agents, each responsible for one logical block group of the input file.
This decomposition mirrors the physical dependency structure of MOOSE [6], which forms a directed acyclic graph
(DAG): each sub-agent executes only after all blocks it depends on are complete, following the topological order
[Mesh]≺[GlobalParams]≺[Variables]≺[Kernels]
≺[Materials]≺[Postprocessors]≺[Executioner], (10)
where≺denotes topological precedence.
Three dependencies in this ordering are worth making explicit. First, op_num declared in [GlobalParams] propagates
into every downstream block referencingηi, so it must be fixed before kernels, materials, or postprocessors are written.
Second, GrainTracker in [UserObjects] requires both variable declarations and material definitions, placing it
last among the physics blocks. Third, the solver tolerances ϵnl andϵl written into [Executioner] are drawn from
θsolver⊂P — the same values the Reviewer agent uses to classify convergence failures at runtime (Section 2.6) —
ensuring consistency between the input file and the error-diagnosis logic. Table 2 summarises each sub-agent, its owned
blocks, key parameters, and upstream dependencies.
Table 2:Input Writer sub-agents and MOOSE block responsibilities.The six sub-agents of f2 generate the MOOSE
.i input file in the topological order of Eq. (10). TheDepends oncolumn lists upstream fields that must be available
before each sub-agent executes.
Sub-agent MOOSE blocks Key parameters set Depends on
(a)Mesh[Mesh]n x/ny/nz, Lx/Ly/Lz,
elem_type (QUAD4 or
HEX8), parallel_type;
enforcesh≤w GB/4
Ω,h,dimfromP
(b)Variables[GlobalParams] ,
[Variables], [ICs],
[AuxVariables]
op_num, ηi fields, V oronoi
or Random IC;bound_value
(LinearizedInterface)
nx,n y from(a)
(c)Kernels[Kernels],[AuxKernels] GrainGrowth or
GrainGrowthLinearizedInterface
module [ 7]; BndsCalcAux,
FeatureFloodCountAux
op_num,η i from(b)
(d)Materials[Materials] ,
[UserObjects]
L, µ, κ via Eq. (4) [5]
(GBEvolution)
or parsed L/κ/µ
(LinearizedInterface);
PolycrystalVoronoi,
GrainTracker
{σ,w GB,M 0,Q} from
M; mesh from(a)
(e)Postprocessors[Postprocessors] TimestepSize , NumDOFs,
NumElements
Variables from(b),
UserObjects from(d)
(f)Executioner[Executioner] , [BCs],
[Adaptivity],[Outputs]
PJFNK [25], bdf2,
IterationAdaptiveDT,
ϵnl, ϵl, periodic BCs, AMR,
CSV
θsolver,θ run fromP
Beyond parameter transcription, three sub-agents encode physics directly into the input file. The Mesh sub-agent(a)
selects QUAD4 elements for 2D and HEX8 for 3D, and enforces the interface-resolution constrainth≤w GB/4 derived
from Eq. (2), raising a configuration error before any file is written if the mesh would under-resolve the diffuse
interface. The Materials sub-agent(d)branches on formulation: for GBEvolution it computes{L,µ,κ} analytically
via Eq. (4) from the user-specified set{σ,w GB,M 0,Q,T} [26]; for LinearizedInterface it derivesL andκ from
the same physically grounded copper parameters{MGB,σ,w GB} and adds a bound_value constraint that stabilizes
the linearized free energy at coarse mesh resolution. (An earlier version of this branch emitted placeholder material
constants rather than the copper parameters used by the GBEvolution path; this defect, surfaced by the benchmark
and falsified by the Skeptic, is corrected as described in Section 2.13.) The Postprocessors sub-agent(e)registers
GrainTracker exclusively in [UserObjects] rather than [Postprocessors] — a distinction that proved critical
6

during failure recovery (Section 3.7) — and configures TimestepSize, NumDOFs, and NumElements as the primary
CSV observables from which the Visualization agent extractsN(t)(Eq. (6)).
Two additional design choices promote reproducibility and flexibility. The initial condition type is independently
selectable: Voronoi initializes grains via PolycrystalVoronoi with a fixed random seed, ensuring bit-for-bit
reproducibility across runs; Random uses PolycrystalRandomIC with random_type = discrete for more natural
initial microstructures without a fixed grain count. For V oronoi ICs, the coloring algorithm is selectable betweenjp
(Jones–Plassmann [27], recommended forN grains >op_num) andbt(backtracking, requiresN grains =op_num).
Once all six sub-agents complete their blocks, the assembled .i file undergoes a final syntax validation pass checking
block completeness, parameter types, and cross-reference consistency; only a file that passes this check is forwarded
to the Runner agent. In the grain growth benchmark, agent-generated input files achieved 9/10 exact block matches
against an expert-authored reference atT= 450 K, with a relative error in the kinetic rate constant of ∆˜k/˜k= 0.30 %
(Section 3.4).
2.5 Runner Agent
Once the Input Writer has produced a validated .i file, the Runner agentf3 takes sole responsibility for simulation
execution, output organization, and provenance recording (Fig. 1). It is the only agent that interacts directly with the
MOOSE executable and the only one that writes files to disk.
2.5.1 Execution and parallelism
Run directory (self-documenting)
20260303_143022__grain_growth__T450_n20
grain_growth.i
grain_growth.csv
grain_growth.e (Exodus/Nemesis)
run.log
metadata.json
Figure 2:AutoMOOSE run directory structure.
Each run directory is timestamped and self-contained,
comprising: grain_growth.i (complete MOOSE
input file), grain_growth.csv (tabulated grain
count time series N(t), Eq. (6)), run.log (full
solver stdout), metadata.json (structured prove-
nance record encoding all simulation parameters, exe-
cutable path, hostname, MPI configuration, and wall-
clock duration), and record.json (run status and
parsed kinetics metrics). Any run can be exactly repro-
duced by executing the MOOSE command (Eq. (11))
from within this directory, satisfying FAIR data prin-
ciples by construction [11].
For each simulation case,f3 launches MOOSE as a managed
subprocess,
mpiexec -nN MPI phase_field-opt -i sim.i,(11)
whereNMPI≥1 is drawn from θrun⊂P . For temperature
sweep requests,f3 expands the parameter range Θ ={T i}n
i=1
populated by the Architect into n independent simulation in-
stances{Pi}n
i=1, each assigned a unique run identifier, and
dispatches them as concurrent threads. The total sweep wall-
clock time is therefore
Tsweep = max
i∈{1,...,n}
Ti,(12)
rather than the serial sumP
iTi, yielding an approximatelyn-
fold reduction in elapsed time relative to sequential execution.
2.5.2 Run directory and provenance
Before launching each case,f3 creates a timestamped run di-
rectory and copies the validated .i file into it, ensuring that
every run is self-contained from the moment it starts — even
a mid-run crash leaves a recoverable directory. On completion,
the directory contains five files (Fig. 2): sim.i (full MOOSE
input), output.csv (grain count time series N(t), Eq. (6)),
run.log (full solver stdout), metadata.json (provenance
record encoding all fields ofPi, the MOOSE executable path,
hostname, MPI rank count, random seed, and wall-clock du-
rationTi), and record.json (run status and parsed metrics,
updated incrementally during execution). Any run can be ex-
actly reproduced by executing Eq. (11) from within its directory, without reference to any external state — directly
satisfying the reproducibility and FAIR data requirements discussed in Section 2.2 [11].
2.5.3 Live monitoring and exit routing
While MOOSE executes, f3 streams solver stdout to the live log panel in real time, enabling the user to monitor
convergence without polling. On exit,f3 inspects the process exit code and routes control accordingly: a non-zero exit
code triggers handoff to the Reviewer agent (Section 2.6), while a zero exit code passesoutput.csv directly to the
Visualization agent (Section 2.7). This binary routing implements the failure and success paths shown in Fig. 1, and is
the junction at which the pipeline’s completion-aware verification screen is engaged.
7

2.6 Reviewer Agent
When Runner (f3) reports the outcome of a MOOSE invocation, control passes to the Reviewer agentf4, a completion-
aware execution screen. Its role is operational, not epistemic: it determines whether the runexecuted successfully,
distinguishing a genuine solver breakdown from the transient adaptive-timestep events — linear-solve cutbacks that
recover and complete — that are a normal part of robust nonlinear solves. A run that reaches its requested integration
time is admitted as executed; a run that aborts or fails to advance in time is flagged as a failed execution. Judgement
about whether an executed run isphysically credibleis deferred entirely to the Skeptic (Section 2.8); the Reviewer only
asks whether there is a completed result to assess.
2.6.1 Execution screening
f4 evaluates the solver state against the tolerances stored in θsolver⊂P , which were written into [Executioner]
by sub-agent(f)of the Input Writer (Section 2.4). The two primary convergence criteria are the nonlinear residual at
Newton iterationk,

R(k)

2 < ϵnl,(13)
and the linear (Krylov) residual within each Newton step,

r(k)

2 < ϵl,(14)
where R(k) is the global finite-element residual assembled from the Allen–Cahn weak form (Eq. (1)) and r(k) is the
Krylov linear system residual. A persistently large∥R(k)∥2 indicates that the current order parameter field{ηi} has not
minimized the free energyF (Eq. (2)) at the prescribed timestep, directly connecting the numerical failure criterion
to the phase-field physics of Section 2.1. Crucially, f4 reads the completion state from the MOOSE log rather than
from the exit code alone: a log reporting Finished Executing denotes a valid completion even when transient
DIVERGED_ITS warnings appear earlier from adaptive-timestep cutbacks, which prevents normal solver behaviour from
being misread as fatal failure.
2.6.2 Closed-loop recovery module
The pipeline is paired with a closed-loop recovery module ( recovery.py) that acts on failures with a recognized,
correctable signature. The module’s diagnosis draws on two sources: a run that fails to complete is classified directly
from real solver-log signatures (non-finite residuals, convergence-failure messages), while a run that completes but
is falsified by the Skeptic is classified from the physics verdict itself, mapping each violated invariant to a candidate
cause (Section 2.8). Each diagnosis triggers a bounded parameter-level correction; for solver divergence, the primary
response is initial-timestep cutback,
∆t(k+1)
0 =α∆t (k)
0 , α= 0.5,(15)
floored at a minimum step, together with a stepwise tightening of the adaptive-cutback factor. The physical rationale
is that a smaller ∆t reduces the per-step increment ∆ηi, keeping the Newton iterate within the basin of convergence
of the free-energy landscape defined byfloc (Eq. (3)). Other diagnoses map to their own bounded edits — extending
the integration window when the asymptotic regime is not reached, refining the mesh when non-physical nucleation
is flagged — and every correction is capped, logged, and limited to three attempts per task. The corrected input is
regenerated and re-executed through the standard pipeline with no shortcut: a corrected run is classified as credible
only if it independently completes execution and survives Skeptic falsification, so recovery cannot promote a run past
any gate of Section 2.2. Two safeguards bound the module’s action. First, its completion classifier is defensive and
validated against real run logs: a run whose log reports completion, or that reached its target integration time, is never
“corrected” on the basis of a stale status: running record in its metadata. Second, corrections that do not apply
in a given configuration — for example, a spatial-resolution parameter that is meaningless in a two-dimensional run
— are suppressed. Failures with no recognized signature, or tasks whose correction budget is exhausted, fall outside
this bounded envelope and are flagged to the user rather than silently reported. We report the recovery module as
implemented and component-validated; its quantitative behaviour on real failure logs is described in Section 3.7.
2.7 Visualization Agent
With convergence confirmed by a zero exit code from Runner (f3), the Visualization agentf5 completes the pipeline by
extracting quantitative observables, fitting the grain growth kinetics model established in Section 2.1, and returning both
numerical results and a natural-language interpretation to the user — closing the loop from natural-language prompt to
publication-ready analysis.
8

2.7.1 Observable extraction and kinetics fitting
f5 calls the plugin’s parse_results() contract function to extract the grain count time series N(t) from the
output.csv file produced by GrainTracker (sub-agent(e), Section 2.4). f5 then fits N(t) to the grain coars-
ening law (Eq. (6)) by linear regression ofN−1(t) againstt [28], extracting the macroscopic rate constant ˜k(T) for
each temperatureT i∈Θ. Fit quality is quantified by the coefficient of determination,
R2 = 1−
P
i

Ni− ˆNi
2
P
i

Ni− ¯N
2,(16)
whereNi are the GrainTracker grain counts, ˆNi are the model predictions from Eq. (6), and ¯N is the temporal mean.
2.7.2 Arrhenius regression and consistency check
Once{˜k(Ti)}n
i=1 are obtained across the temperature sweep, f5 performs Arrhenius regression by fitting Eq. (7) to
recover the activation energyQfit and pre-exponential factor ˜k0. As established in Section 2.1, Qfit must equal the
activation energyQ originally specified by the user in M⊂P , providing a closed-loop consistency check of the
full pipeline (Eq. (8)). In the grain growth benchmark, f5 recoveredQfit = 0.296 eV against the specified value of
Q= 0.23 eV , withR2 = 0.90 –0.95 atT≥600 K; the suppressed kinetics at T= 300 K are consistent with the
Arrhenius reduction ofL(T)at low temperature (Eq. (5)), in agreement with the Burke–Turnbull framework [29].
2.7.3 Narrated output
Beyond numerical metrics, f5 generates a structured natural-language interpretation of the results, grounding the
kinetics findings in the phase-field model of Section 2.1 and identifying physically notable features — such as the
suppression of coarsening kinetics at low temperature. This narrated output is reproduced verbatim in Section 3.10.
2.8 Skeptic Agent
The Skeptic agentf6 is the framework’s verification stage. It addresses a failure mode that the Reviewer (f4) cannot: a
simulation may run to completion and produce well-formed output, yet still bephysicallywrong. Whereas f4 asks an
operational question — did the run execute? —f6 asks an epistemic one: should the result be believed? This reframes
the final stage of the pipeline from parsing tofalsification, and is a core methodological contribution of the agentic
design: the system does not merely generate and execute a simulation, it adversarially tests its own output against the
physical laws the result must obey.
Given a completed run,f6 applies a battery of physics-grounded falsification tests, each a hypothesis that the result
must satisfy if it is physically valid. A test that failsfalsifiesthe run; a run that survives all tests is reported as credible.
Crucially, each test is paired with a diagnosis that maps the failure to a likely physical or numerical cause, providing
the reasoning needed for remediation. The battery is physics-specific: the dispatcher routes each run to the invariants
appropriate to its governing equations.
2.8.1 Grain-growth invariants
For the non-conserved Allen–Cahn dynamics of grain growth, the per-run battery comprises four invariants.Numerical
integrity (T5):the run must reach its target integration time without fatal solver breakdown; reaching the requested
end_time is treated as decisive evidence of numerical validity, and transient adaptive-timestep events (linear-solve
cutbacks) that recover and complete are not failures, whereas an application abort or a solve that never advances in time
is.Monotonicity (T1):the grain count must be non-increasing over time; a sustained increase indicates non-physical
spontaneous nucleation or a grain-tracker artifact.Asymptotic consistency (T2):the initial grain count must match the
requested number of seeds, confirming correct initial-condition generation.Parabolic scaling (T3):the microstructure
must obey the Burke–Turnbull coarsening law, N−1(t) linear in t with a positive rate constant and coefficient of
determinationR2≥0.90 (Eq. (6)). A fifth, cross-run invariant tests Arrhenius consistency over a temperature sweep
(T4): the rate constants ˜k(T) must increase monotonically with temperature and yield a linear ln ˜k versus 1/T relation
(R2≥0.90), from which the activation energy is recovered (Eq. (7)).
2.8.2 Conserved-dynamics invariants
For the conserved Cahn–Hilliard dynamics of spinodal decomposition, the invariants areexactphysical laws, which
makes them stronger falsification tests than the kinetics-based grain-growth checks.Mass conservation ( S1):the
9

integral of the conserved composition must remain constant to within a numerical tolerance (relative drift≤10−5), as
required by the Cahn–Hilliard conservation law.Free-energy dissipation (S2):the total free energy must show a net
decrease consistent with the gradient-flow structure of the dynamics; transient step-wise increases are admitted only if
they remain within numerical round-off, and a sustained increase beyond tolerance falsifies the run.Phase separation
(S3):the composition field must separate toward the two-phase equilibrium tie-line, with the extreme compositions
approaching the equilibrium phase concentrations.
2.8.3 Verdict, diagnosis, and recovery
A run is reported as credible only if it survives every applicable invariant; otherwise it is flagged as falsified, annotated
with the specific invariants violated and a diagnosis localizing the likely cause (for example, an unconverged or
non-conservative solve for a mass-conservation failure, or an integration window too short for the asymptotic regime
for a parabolic-scaling failure). The Skeptic itself only detects and falsifies; it never repairs. Building on its diagnoses,
however, we implement a closed-loop recovery module (recovery.py) that consumes the Skeptic’s verdict and, for
the subset of failures attributable to time-step divergence, maps the diagnosis to a bounded parameter-level correction —
a reduced initial time step and a tightened adaptive cutback — and regenerates and re-executes the simulation through
the standard pipeline. The module is completion-aware and validated against real run logs: completed runs are never
“corrected,” divergences that make no time advance are recognized and routed to correction, and a corrected run is
reported valid only if it independently passes the Skeptic. Failures rooted in formulation or spatial resolution rather
than time-stepping fall outside this envelope and are flagged rather than forced. By flagging runs that lie outside the
validated envelope — rather than silently reporting their metrics — the Skeptic ensures that only physically credible
results enter the downstream analysis.
2.9 Plugin Architecture
A core design principle of AutoMOOSE is that the six-agent orchestration pipeline is entirely physics-agnostic. The
connection between the agents and the underlying MOOSE physics is mediated by aplugin contract— a minimal
two-function interface that any physics module must implement — allowing new simulation types to be integrated
without modifying the shared agent infrastructure.
2.9.1 Plugin contract
Each plugin implements exactly two functions. generate_input(**params)→str receives the fields of
M⊂P and returns a complete MOOSE .i input file as a string; it is called by the Input Writer (Section 2.4).
parse_results(csv_data: dict)→dict receives the parsed CSV content as a dictionary of time-series arrays
and returns a structured dictionary of observables — grain count trajectoryN(t), rate constant ˜k, goodness-of-fitR2,
peak DOF count, and wall-clock statistics — and is called by the Visualization agent (Section 2.7). This two-function
contract is the complete boundary between the physics-specific and physics-agnostic layers: the agent pipeline reads
from and writes toP without direct knowledge of any MOOSE block or physical model, as all physics-specific logic is
encapsulated within the plugin.
2.9.2 Plugin metadata
Each plugin additionally exposes a PLUGIN metadata dictionary that the framework uses for UI population, agent
configuration, and sweep orchestration. The metadata registers: a human-readable label; the executable_key pointing
to the correct MOOSE binary; a params dictionary of configurable parameters with default values; apresets library of
named parameter configurations; a sweepable list of parameters available for parallel sweep dispatch; a result_keys
list identifying the CSV columns to track; and a system_prompt string that specializes the Architect agent’s physics
knowledge for this formulation. This self-describing design means the UI, the Architect’s intent-parsing logic, and
the sweep dispatcher are all populated automatically from plugin metadata, with no hardcoded assumptions about any
specific physics module.
2.9.3 Grain growth plugin
The grain growth plugin is the first fully-implemented plugin in AutoMOOSE. It supports two Allen–Cahn formulations
(Section 2.1), two IC types, 2D and 3D geometries, and seven named presets spanning from a lightweight 2D test (10
grains, 12×12 mesh) to a production 3D HPC configuration (6000 grains,1803 mesh, 32 MPI ranks, checkpoint output,
and a Terminator that halts execution when the grain count falls below a user-specified threshold). GBEvolution
uses the multi-order-parameter Allen–Cahn model [5] with{L,µ,κ} computed analytically from{σ,w GB,M 0,Q,T}
via Eq. (4). LinearizedInterface employs a linearized formulation [30] that produces sharper interfaces at coarser
10

Architect
agent Simulation plan
run_id
Input params
sim.i content
Input
writer
agent
run_id.mpi.sim.i path
status.exit_code
Runner
agent
run_id .error type
Corrected params
Reviewer
agent
viz_id
Physical quantity
Visualization
agent
User intentJSON response
Claude
Desktop
Claude
Code
Custom Script CI/CD Pipeline
MCP Clients
plugin_id query
Plugin list . Params
.sweepable
Plugin
Registry
run_id . n_lines
Stdout . total_lines
Simulation
logs
run_id query
status . Duration
Run
Status
Health query
status . Executables
fpund
Health
check
HTTP RESTJSON
response
AutoMOOSE
MCP Server
FastAPI Backend
Localhost:8000 . uvicorn server:app
Agent
Pipeline
Plugin
Registry
MOOSE
Engine
httpx :8000
stdio stdio
HTTP/SSE . Port 8001 HTTP/SSE . Port 8001
(Orchestrator)
Skeptic
agent
verdict {credible | falsified}
completed run + run_id
Figure 3:Model Context Protocol server architecture of AutoMOOSE.The MCP server (port 8001, center)
acts as the central orchestration hub between external LLM clients and the internal agent pipelineS (Eq. (8)).Top:
four supported client entry points — Claude Desktop, Claude Code, custom scripts, and CI/CD pipelines — all
communicating via HTTP and Server-Sent Events (SSE) on port 8001.Left:the AutoMOOSE agent pipeline forms
the core intelligence layer; black arrows denote control flow (requests and commands) and red arrows denote data
flow (JSON responses, .i file content, run identifiers, and verification verdicts). Execution outcomes return through
the verification stages (the Reviewer’s completion screen and the Skeptic’s falsification); on a recoverable divergence,
the closed-loop recovery module re-enters the pipeline with a bounded correction (Section 3.7).Right:four backend
resource endpoints — Plugin Registry, Simulation Logs, Run Status, and Health Check — each mapped to one or more
of the ten registered MCP tools (Table 3).Bottom:the FastAPI backend (port 8000) comprises three internal modules —
Agent Pipeline, Plugin Registry, and MOOSE Engine — accessed by the MCP server over HTTP REST.
meshes, preferred for large-scale 3D runs. For 3D geometries, the plugin automatically switches to HEX8 elements,
parallel_type = distributed, and Nemesis-format parallel output withPerfGraphOutputfor HPC profiling.
2.9.4 Plugin registry and extensibility
Plugins are loaded dynamically at runtime from the plugins/ directory by plugin_registry.py, which scans for
Python modules implementing the two-function contract and registers them by name. A new physics module requires
only two functions, a PLUGIN metadata dictionary, and a physics-specific system prompt; the orchestration layer, agent
pipeline, MCP server, and UI require no changes. Beyond the grain-growth plugin, a second plugin — Spinodal
Decomposition (conserved Cahn–Hilliard [31]) — is fully implemented and validated end-to-end on a realistic Fe–Cr
alloy (Sections 2.10 and 3.3), demonstrating that the framework generalizes across the non-conserved and conserved
dynamics. Two further plugins — Ferroelectric Switching (Landau–Ginzburg–Devonshire [ 32]) and Solidification
(Allen–Cahn dendritic [33]) — are currently registered as stubs and will be fully implemented in subsequent releases.
2.10 Spinodal Decomposition: Model and Fe–Cr Validation
To demonstrate that the framework generalizes beyond non-conserved dynamics, a second plugin
(plugins/spinodal/plugin.py) implements spinodal decomposition via the conserved Cahn–Hilliard equation.
11

Unlike grain growth, the order parameter here is a conserved composition field c, which imposes an exact
mass-conservation law and changes the governing dynamics from Allen–Cahn to Cahn–Hilliard. The plugin uses the
split form, evolving the compositionctogether with a chemical potentialw,
∂c
∂t =∇·

M∇w

, w= ∂floc
∂c −κ c∇2c,(17)
whereM(c) is the interdiffusion mobility,floc(c) the local free-energy density, andκc the gradient-energy coefficient.
The plugin is validated on a realistic alloy system: Fe–Cr spinodal decomposition at 500 ◦C, the phase separation
underlying the 475–500◦C embrittlement of ferritic steels, with equilibrium compositions of 23.6 and 82.3 mol% Cr.
The local free energy and mobility use the CALPHAD (CALculation of PHAse Diagrams) free-energy parameterization
for Fe–Cr, with the local free energy expressed as
floc(c) =Ac+B(1−c) +Cclnc+D(1−c) ln(1−c)
+Ec(1−c) +Fc(1−c)(2c−1) +Gc(1−c)(2c−1) 2, (18)
with coefficientsA–G and unit-conversion factors as given in the generated input (Supplementary Section S8), and
a concentration-dependent mobility M(c) of the same fitted form. The coefficients place the initial composition
c0 = 0.4677inside the spinodal (linearly unstable,f ′′
loc <0) region, so the alloy decomposes spontaneously.
From a single natural-language specification, the agent generates the complete split Cahn–Hilliard input, run on a
25×25 nm2 periodic domain (100×100QUAD4 elements) with an initial condition ofc0 = 0.4677 perturbed by uniform
random noise of amplitude0.02 to seed the instability, and the total free energy (bulk plus gradient) accumulated through
a TotalFreeEnergy auxiliary field. The run is scored by the Skeptic against the conserved-dynamics invariantsS1–S3
of Section 2.8; the validation outcome is reported in Section 3.3.
2.11 Model Context Protocol Interface
Building on the agent pipeline described in Sections 2.3–2.9, AutoMOOSE additionally exposes the full workflowS
(Eq. (8)) as a Model Context Protocol (MCP) server layer (Fig. 3), enabling headless operation from Claude Desktop,
Claude Code, or any MCP-compatible client without requiring the browser-based interface [ 21]. From the client’s
perspective, triggering a simulation is equivalent to invoking Eq.(8) remotely: the client specifies user intentU as a tool
argument, and the MCP server coordinatesf1 throughf6 sequentially, returning the completed planPi and extracted
metrics as a structured JSON response.
2.11.1 Server architecture
The MCP server acts as the central orchestration hub, coordinating agents, plugins, and the execution backend through
a unified JSON-based data flow (Fig. 3). It is implemented in Python using Starlette/uvicorn and listens on port 8001,
while the FastAPI [24] simulation backend runs independently on port 8000. This decoupled topology allows the MCP
layer to be replaced or extended without modifying either the agent logic or the MOOSE execution environment. Two
transport modes are supported: stdio transport, in which the server process is spawned as a child of the orchestrator
and communicates over standard input/output streams (used by Claude Desktop), and SSE transport, which exposes a
persistent HTTP endpoint for remote clients, CI/CD pipelines, and custom scripts. Both modes expose an identical
surface of ten tools enumerated in Table 3.
2.11.2 Data flow and tool schemas
All communication through the MCP server follows a consistent two-channel pattern (Fig. 3): black arrows denote
control flow — requests, commands, and queries — while red arrows denote data flow — JSON responses, .i file
content, run identifiers, and corrected parameters. Each tool is registered with a JSON Schema describing its input
parameters and return type, which the LLM agent receives at context initialization via the MCPinitialize handshake.
Tool schemas are the sole mechanism by which agents discover available capabilities: no hard-coded tool names appear
in agent prompts, so adding a new tool to the registry automatically makes it available to any agent whose system
prompt grants permission to call it. Tools are divided into two permission classes (Table 3): read-only tools (†) available
to all agents for querying state, and execution tools (‡) that launch or modify simulation processes, accessible only to
the Runner agentf 3 under the orchestrator’s permission policy.
2.11.3 Backend resource endpoints
The right side of Fig. 3 shows four backend resource endpoints that the MCP server queries on behalf of agents. The
Plugin Registrystores reusable simulation modules and is queried via plugin identifier and parameter lists, underpinning
12

the generate_input and get_results tools that map directly onto the two-function plugin contract (Section 2.9).
Simulation Logsprovide solver stdout and execution traces, accessed via get_log_tail to enable the Reviewer agent
f4 to inspect MOOSE diagnostics without direct filesystem access.Run Statustracks job state and wall-clock duration,
queried by get_run_status using a unique run_id assigned at dispatch.Health Checkvalidates system executables
and environment readiness, exposed viahealth_checkbefore any simulation is launched.
2.11.4 Verification arc
A key architectural feature visible in Fig. 3 is the verification arc that follows execution: from Runner ( f3) to the
Reviewer (f4) completion screen, and then to the Skeptic (f6) falsification stage. Whenf3 reports a run outcome, the
MCP server routes the log tof4, which determines whether the run executed to completion; every completed run is
then passed tof6, which tests it against the physics invariants it must satisfy. Only runs that both execute and survive
falsification are reported to the client, and divergence-class failures may additionally be routed to the bounded recovery
module (Section 2.6). This verification arc, rather than a simple launch-and-return, is what distinguishes AutoMOOSE
from a simulation launcher.
2.11.5 Headless operation and composability
The MCP interface enables two usage patterns not supported by the chat frontend. First,headless operation: an external
agent or script can drive the complete AutoMOOSE pipeline — constructing a parameter sweep, dispatching runs,
polling status, and retrieving results — entirely through structured tool calls, with no human in the loop and no browser
session required. This is the natural mode for integration with automated materials discovery pipelines, active learning
loops, or high-throughput screening workflows. Second,tool composability: because MCP tools are first-class objects
in the Claude API tool-use protocol, an orchestrating agent can interleave AutoMOOSE tool calls with calls to other
MCP servers — for example, querying a crystallographic database, retrieving CALPHAD thermodynamic data, or
writing results to a laboratory notebook — within a single reasoning context.
Table 3:MCP tools exposed by the AutoMOOSE server.Tools marked (†) are available to all agents; tools marked (‡)
execute or modify simulation state and are accessible only to the Runner agentf3 under the orchestrator’s permission
policy. Full argument schemas are given in Table S3 (Supplementary Information).
Tool Class Description
health_check†Verify server and backend availability
list_plugins†Enumerate registered plugins and their status
generate_input†Render a MOOSE.ifile via the plugin registry
run_simulation‡Launch a single MOOSE job; return run identifier
run_sweep‡Fan out a parametric sweep; return run identifiers
get_run_status†Query the terminal or running state of a job
get_results†Retrieve parsed postprocessor output and narrative
list_runs†List all runs with metadata summary
get_log_tail†Stream the tail of a MOOSE solver log
stop_run‡Send a termination signal to a running job
2.12 Parameter Sweep Automation
The MCP interface described in Section 2.11 exposes sweep execution as a first-class capability through the
run_sweep tool, but the underlying sweep mechanism operates at the level of the simulation plan. The frame-
work supports automated parameter studies by expanding P (Eq. (9)) into a family of independent cases {Pi}n
i=1
indexed over a user-defined parameter range Θ ={θ i}n
i=1. For the temperature sweep demonstrated here,
θi =T i∈{300,450,600,750}K, and the Architect agent populatesθ run in eachP i with the corresponding tempera-
ture.
The physical significance of this parameterization flows directly through the model: each Ti propagates through Eq. (5)
to set the Allen–Cahn mobility L(Ti), which in turn determines the macroscopic rate constant ˜k(Ti) extracted by
the Visualization agentf5 via Eq. (6). The total sweep wall-clock time is bounded by Eq. (12), since all cases are
dispatched concurrently. Once complete, aggregated results{˜k(Ti), R2
i}n
i=1 are compiled automatically and passed to
13

the Arrhenius fit of Eq. (7), recovering the activation energyQfit and closing the quantitative loop from user-specified
grain boundary parameters through the full pipeline. Each case retains a complete metadata.json provenance record
encoding all fields ofPi, the hostname, MOOSE executable path, wall-clock duration, and output file locations, ensuring
full reproducibility from the run directory alone [11].
2.13 Benchmark Design and Execution
The framework is evaluated on a benchmark of 25 end-to-end grain-growth tasks spanning six regimes: a core
temperature and grain-count sweep, spatial resolution and domain variations, the two Allen–Cahn formulations
(GBEvolution and LinearizedInterface), robustness across initial-condition seeds, three-dimensional cases, and
high-temperature and high-density stress tests. Each task is specified by a natural-language prompt and carried through
the full pipeline — generation, execution, and verification — with no human intervention. The complete prompt set,
listed verbatim, and the per-task gate outcomes are given in Supplementary Section S7.
Each task is scored against five pre-registered, machine-checkable gates, with no human judgement: (G1) the agent
produces a parseable MOOSE input; (G2) the simulation runs to completion without solver divergence; (G3) the
microstructure coarsens (final grain count below initial); (G4) parabolic Burke–Turnbull kinetics are recovered (R2≥
0.90, Eq. (6)); and (G5) the fitted rate constant is physically valid ( ˜k >0 ). We report two tiers: avalid-and-runs
rate (G1–G3) and a stricterfullrate (G1–G5), the latter additionally requiring quantitative kinetics, which depend on
production-length integration to develop the asymptotic regime. Each task is, in addition, independently falsification-
tested by the Skeptic (Section 2.8), so that a task counts as fully credible only if it both clears the gates and survives
falsification.
The grain-growth physics uses the MOOSE GBEvolution module with copper parameters from Schönfelderet
al.[ 26]: σ= 0.708 J m−2, wGB = 14 nm, M0 = 2.5×10 −6 m4 J−1 s−1, Q= 0.23 eV . Solver settings are
PJFNK [25] with BDF2 time integration, ASM preconditioning, ϵnl = 10−8, ϵl = 10−4, and adaptive timestep-
ping (IterationAdaptiveDT). The full suite is executed at production integration length on NERSC Perlmutter, with
each of the 25 tasks assigned a dedicated compute node within a single 12-hour batch allocation.
2.13.1 Benchmark-driven generator corrections
Executing the suite surfaced two systematic input-generation defects, each falsified by the Skeptic rather than reported
as a metric. First, the LinearizedInterface formulation emitted placeholder material constants rather than the
copper GBEvolution parameters used elsewhere, producing an interface mobility orders of magnitude too large;
the stiff variational-inequality solve then diverged on the first nonlinear step with no time advance. Second, the
three-dimensional cases diverged under the default time-stepping (linear solves failing with DIVERGED_ITS), the
step size and solver settings inherited from the two-dimensional configuration being too aggressive for the stiffer
three-dimensional system. Both were diagnosed from the solver error signatures together with the Skeptic’s verdicts and
corrected in the generator — the linearized-interface block now uses the physically grounded copper parameters, and
the three-dimensional path uses a smaller initial time step with a stronger preconditioner — and verified by re-execution.
The benchmark results reported below reflect the original configuration in which these cases failed; the corrections
are forward-looking improvements committed to the public repository, an instance of the benchmark functioning as a
diagnostic that drives a falsification-to-fix loop rather than merely a pass/fail score.
2.14 User Interface and Demonstration Workflow
To make the agent pipeline accessible to domain scientists without programming expertise, AutoMOOSE provides a
browser-based chat interface that exposes the full workflow through six interactive panels. Figure 1 illustrates this inter-
face using the four-temperature grain growth sweep (T∈{300,450,600,750}K) as a representative demonstration.
The workflow begins in theChat panel(Fig. 1a), where the user submits a single natural-language prompt specifying the
sweep temperatures, physical model, domain geometry, and analysis goal — without any MOOSE syntax knowledge.
The Architect agentf1 parses this prompt and auto-populates theConfigure panel(Fig. 1b) with the corresponding
simulation planP (Eq. (9)), mapping user intent onto physical parameters{σ,w GB,M 0,Q} and numerical settings
{θsolver,θ run}; the user may inspect or override any field before launching.
With the plan confirmed, the Runner agentf3 dispatches four independent MOOSE processes concurrently via the sweep
orchestrator, visible as parallel run cards in theRun Sidebar(Fig. 1c), achieving total wall-clock time Tsweep = maxiTi
(Eq. (12)) rather than the serial sumP
iTi. Solver progress is streamed in real time to theLive Log panel, where the
Reviewer agentf4 monitors nonlinear residual convergence∥R(k)∥2 <ϵ nl (Eq. (13)) and triggers timestep cutback
∆t(k+1) =α∆t (k) (Eq. (15)) on convergence failure. The agent-generated .i input file is simultaneously accessible in
14

theInput File viewer(Fig. 1f), assembled by f2 following the block order of Eq. (10) with physical parameters fromM
converted to phase-field coefficients{L,µ,κ}via Eq. (4).
Upon completion, the Visualization agent f5 populates theResults panel(Fig. 1d) with N(t) curves for all four
temperatures fitted to the grain coarsening law (Eq. (6)). Coarsening kinetics are recovered at T≥450 K, with
R2 = 0.90–0.95 atT≥600 K, consistent with Burke–Turnbull theory [ 29]; the zero coarsening at T= 300 K is
attributable to Arrhenius suppression ofL(T) at low temperature (Eq. (5)). The complete workflow — from natural-
language prompt to publication-ready kinetics analysis — requires no MOOSE syntax knowledge and completes in
under two hours on a standard workstation for the four-temperature sweep demonstrated here.
3 Results
We validate AutoMOOSE at several complementary levels. We first demonstrate the full agent pipeline end-to-end on a
copper polycrystalline grain-growth workflow — from a single natural-language prompt to quantitative kinetics analysis,
with no manual file editing or direct solver interaction (Section 3.1). We then evaluate breadth and reliability on a
pre-registered 25-task benchmark with machine-checkable gates and independent Skeptic falsification (Section 3.2), and
establish generalization to a second, conserved-dynamics domain — Fe–Cr spinodal decomposition (Section 3.3). The
remaining subsections examine the mechanisms behind these results: input-file fidelity (Section 3.4), grain-coarsening
kinetics (Section 3.5), ensemble Arrhenius recovery of the activation energy (Section 3.6), failure detection and recovery
(Section 3.7), a controlled baseline against bare frontier models (Section 3.8), the role of Skeptic falsification as
methodology (Section 3.9), and agent-narrated interpretation (Section 3.10).
3.1 End-to-End Workflow Demonstration
The benchmark is initiated by submitting the following natural-language prompt to the AutoMOOSE chat interface:
Run a grain growth simulation atT={300,450,600,750} K withσ= 0.708 J m−2,wGB = 14 nm,
M0 = 2.5×10 −6 m4 J−1 s−1,Q= 0.23 eV [26]. Use 15 Voronoi grains on a 1000×1000 nm2
domain with a12×12mesh (uniform refinement level 3) and periodic boundary conditions.
From this single prompt, the six-agent pipeline executes the complete simulation campaign without any further user
input. The Architect (f1) parses the sweep intent and decomposes the request into four independent simulation tasks,
each populating a separate planPi (Eq. (9)). The Input Writer (f2) generates a syntactically valid, physically correct .i
file for each task via its six specialized sub-agents, converting the user-specified parameters{σ,w GB,M 0,Q} to phase-
field coefficients{L,µ,κ} through Eq. (4). The Runner (f3) dispatches all four jobs concurrently via the run_sweep
MCP tool. Because the cases are mutually independent, the sweep is embarrassingly parallel and its wall-clock time is
bounded by the slowest single run (Eq.(12)),Tsweep≈22,820 s, rather than the serial sum (P
iTi≈41,261 s; Table 5),
a 1.8× reduction in wall-clock time. We emphasize that this is a workflow-level scheduling effect from concurrent job
dispatch, not a solver-level acceleration: AutoMOOSE does not modify or speed up MOOSE’s numerics, and the figure
simply reflects that independent sweep cases run in parallel rather than in sequence. Where a run fails to execute, the
Reviewer (f4) flags it and, for recoverable time-step divergences, the closed-loop recovery module applies a bounded
correction (Section 3.7). On successful completion, the Visualization agent (f5) extracts grain-count trajectories from
the GrainTracker CSV output, fits the coarsening law (Eq.(6)) to recover{˜k(Ti)}, and performs Arrhenius regression
to extractQ fit.
Table 4 summarises agent-level performance across the benchmark. The complete pipeline — from prompt submission
to publication-ready kinetics analysis — required approximately 380 min (≈6.3 h) of total wall-clock time, dominated
by MOOSE compute time atT= 750K (22,820s). The active human effort in AutoMOOSE is limited to composing
the single prompt; by contrast, an experienced researcher hand-authoring four input files and performing kinetics
analysis manually would require comparable active scripting effort in addition to the same compute time. The adaptive
time-stepper grew ∆t from 25 ns to∼284 ns as grain boundary curvature diminished, with peak mesh resolution of
∼261,000degrees of freedom per run.
3.2 Benchmark Results
We evaluate the framework on the 25-task pre-registered benchmark of Section 2.13, executed at production integration
length on NERSC Perlmutter (one dedicated node per task, single 12-hour allocation), and score each task against the
five machine-checkable gates G1–G5 plus independent Skeptic falsification. The aggregate outcome is summarized per
regime in Table 6; the full per-task gate outcomes and the Skeptic verdict for each task are given in Supplementary
Section S7.
15

Table 4:AutoMOOSE agent pipeline performanceon the four-temperature grain growth benchmark ( T∈
{300,450,600,750} K). First-attempt success: correct output without Reviewer intervention. Timing on a Mac-
Book Pro (Apple M-series, single core).
Agent Stage 1 st-attempt Key metric
f1 Architect Intent parsing 1/1 Correct sweep intent, formulation, BCs
f2 Input Writer.ifile generation 4/4 6/12 blocks exact match (Section 3.4)
f3 Runner Parallel execution 4/4T sweep≈22,820s (1.8×vs. serial, scheduling only)
f4 Reviewer Completion screen — 3/3 failed runs flagged (Section 3.7)
f5 Visualization Kinetics extraction 4/4R 2 = 0.90–0.95atT≥600K (Section 3.5)
End-to-end 4/4Prompt→kinetics analysis:≈380min
Table 5:Per-run execution statisticsfor the four-temperature grain growth sweep on a MacBook Pro (Apple M-
series, single core per run). All runs dispatched concurrently via the run_sweep MCP tool. Nf : final grain count
att= 4000 ns; DOFs: peak degrees of freedom. T= 300 K shows no coarsening due to Arrhenius suppression
(Section 3.5). The 1.8× reduction is a workflow-level scheduling effect — independent cases run concurrently, so
wall-clock time is bounded by the slowest run — and not a solver-level acceleration of MOOSE.
T(K) TimestepsN f DOFs (peak) Wall time (s)
300 31 15 260,124 509
450 85 13 261,862 4,165
600 306 6 261,086 13,768
750 602 3 260,832 22,820
Serial total 41,261
Concurrent (bounded by slowest run) 22,820
Wall-clock reduction (scheduling)1.8×
All 25 tasks produce a parseable MOOSE input (G1= 25/25), confirming that the generator reliably emits syntactically
valid simulations across every regime. Nineteen of 25 run to completion and coarsen (thevalid-and-runstier, G1–G3
= 19/25), and 15 of 25 additionally satisfy quantitative parabolic kinetics and a positive rate constant (thefulltier, G1–
G5 = 15/25); independent Skeptic falsification corroborates exactly this set of 15 credible runs. The parabolic-kinetics
gate is recovered for 18 of 25 tasks at production integration length (G4 = 18/25), a regime that short under-integrated
runs do not reach.
The failures are localized and interpretable rather than diffuse. The four LinearizedInterface (formulation) tasks
generate valid input and coarsen correctly but do not complete within the wall-clock window in the configuration
benchmarked, owing to the placeholder-material defect diagnosed in Section 2.13; the two three-dimensional tasks
diverge under the inherited two-dimensional time-stepping. Both failure modes were falsified by the Skeptic and
corrected in the generator as forward-looking fixes (Section 2.13). The remaining sub-gate misses are a small number of
low-grain-count and robustness cases that coarsen correctly but fall marginally below theR2≥0.90 kinetics threshold.
Concentrating the failures in two well-understood mechanisms — rather than scattering them across regimes — is what
makes the benchmark useful as a diagnostic.
3.3 Second Physics Domain: Spinodal Decomposition
To establish that the framework generalizes beyond the non-conserved Allen–Cahn dynamics of grain growth, we
apply it to a second, physically distinct domain: Fe–Cr spinodal decomposition under the conserved Cahn–Hilliard
dynamics (Eq. (17)) of Section 2.10. From a single natural-language specification, the agent generated the complete
split Cahn–Hilliard input, which was executed on a 25×25 nm2 periodic domain (100×100QUAD4 elements) from
an initial composition c0 = 0.4677 seeded with 0.02-amplitude noise. The composition field evolves through the
characteristic stages of spinodal decomposition (Fig. 4): an initially noisy, near-uniform field develops an interconnected
Cr-rich/Fe-rich modulation, which then breaks into discrete Cr-rich domains that grow and separate.
The decisive test, however, is quantitative. Because the dynamics are conserved, the Skeptic’s invariants here areexact
physical lawsrather than the kinetics-based heuristics used for grain growth, making them a more stringent falsification
16

Table 6: AutoMOOSE performance across then=25 benchmark regimes (production integration length; each task on a
dedicated Perlmutter node within a 12-hour allocation). G1: valid input generated; G2: ran to completion within the
wall-clock window; G3: coarsened (Nf <N 0); G4: parabolic (Burke–Turnbull) kinetics (R2≥0.90 ); G5: positive
rate constant.Valid & runscounts G1–G3;Fullcounts all five gates.
RegimenG1 G2 G3 G4 G5 Valid & runs Full
Core (T,Nsweep) 8 8 8 8 6 8 8/8 6/8
Resolution / domain 4 4 4 4 4 4 4/4 4/4
Formulation (Lin. Interface) 4 4 0 4 3 4 0/4 0/4
Robustness (seeds) 4 4 4 4 2 4 4/4 2/4
3D 2 2 0 0 0 1 0/2 0/2
High-Tstress 2 2 2 2 2 2 2/2 2/2
Density stress 1 1 1 1 1 1 1/1 1/1
Total 25 25 19 23 18 24 19/25 15/25
Table 7: Fe–Cr spinodal-decomposition (Cahn–Hilliard) validation invariants from the AutoMOOSE run (500 ◦C).
Equilibrium target concentrations 23.6 / 82.3 mol% Cr; the Cr-mass drift is assessed against the SkepticS1 tolerance
(10−5).
Invariant Value
Relative Cr-mass drift6.28×10 −6
Free-energy decrease 0.4%
Energy monotone (transient increasing steps) within tol. (15)
Final Cr range[0.239,0.826]
Cr-rich precipitates (final) 1
battery (Table 7). The run satisfies all three: the integral of the Cr composition is conserved to a relative drift of
6.28×10 −6, within the Skeptic’sS1 tolerance of 10−5; the total free energy (bulk plus gradient) shows a net decrease
of 0.4% to a stable plateau, with transient step-wise increases at a small number of steps that remain within numerical
round-off, consistent with the gradient-flow structure of the dynamics (S2); and the composition separates toward the
two-phase equilibrium tie-line, the extreme compositions reachingcmax = 0.826 (Cr-rich) andcmin = 0.239 (Fe-rich)
against the equilibrium targets of 0.823 and 0.236 mol fraction Cr (S3), with a single Cr-rich precipitate at the final
time. That an agent-generated simulation reproduces an exact conservation law to a stated numerical tolerance in a
second physical domain — without any change to the agent pipeline — is the strongest evidence that the framework’s
reasoning is physics-general rather than tuned to a single problem.
3.4 Input File Fidelity
Having established the aggregate benchmark outcome and generalization to a second physics domain, we now examine
the mechanisms underlying these results in detail: how faithfully the agent reproduces expert input structure (Section 3.4),
the grain-growth kinetics it recovers (Section 3.5), and the activation energy it extracts (Section 3.6). These subsections
use a single representative worked example for transparency, complemented by the at-scale statistics that confirm the
example generalizes.
Two human-written baselines are used for complementary purposes throughout this section, and we keep them clearly
separate. For structural input file fidelity (this subsection), we compare against an expert-authored reference adapted
from the canonical MOOSE grain growth tutorial [9] (44×44 mesh, 20 grains) — the standard community benchmark for
evaluating whether an agent reproduces established MOOSE input structure. For kinetics and Arrhenius benchmarking
(Sections 3.5–3.6), we use a separately constructed physics-matched reference with identical mesh (12×12 , refinement
level 3) and grain count (N0 = 15) to the AutoMOOSE runs, enabling a controlled comparison of simulation output.
The two baselines answer different questions and must not be conflated: the structural comparison asks whether the agent
produces awell-formed, expert-equivalent input file, while the kinetics comparison asks whether two physics-matched
runs produce thesame quantitative output. The kinetics comparison is necessarily physics-matched (identical mesh and
grain count) because any difference in those parameters would itself change the kinetics; the structural comparison
deliberately is not, because the tutorial reference and the prompt specify different mesh and grain counts by design.
This raises an important point about what the structural comparison measures. Some differences between the agent’s
file and the tutorial reference arise not from agent error but from the promptintentionallyspecifying different values —
17

t = 0.1 s t = 11.33 s t = 997.4 s
t = 9.721 105 s×t = 9.751 104 s×t = 9469 s
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 4:Fe–Cr spinodal decomposition (500 ◦C): composition evolution and Skeptic validation invariants.Top
two rows: composition field c(x,y) at increasing times, from the noisy initial condition through an interconnected
spinodal pattern to grown, well-separated Cr-rich domains (each panel independently scaled to its composition range).
Bottom row: (a) S1 Cr-mass conservation, relative drift 6.28×10 −6, within the 10−5 tolerance; (b)S2 free-energy
dissipation, net decrease to a stable plateau (transient round-off increases within tolerance); (c)S3 phase separation
toward the equilibrium tie-line (Cr-rich0.823, Fe-rich0.236mol fraction).
a 12×12 mesh and 15 grains rather than the tutorial’s 44×44 and 20. Counting these prompt-driven differences as
fidelity failures would penalize the agent for correctly following the user’s instructions. We therefore score fidelity
only over the parameters the agent isfree to choose: the set of prompt-specified parameters ( {nx, ny, xmax, ymax,
grain_num, rand_seed,T , GB properties, end_time, auto_direction}) is excluded from the mismatch count, so
a block is judged on whether the agent reproduced the reference’snon-promptparameters, not on whether it echoed
values the user deliberately changed. A block in which the only differences are prompt-driven is therefore classified as
an exact match.
A necessary condition for any agentic simulation framework is that autonomously generated input files are not only
syntactically valid but physically correct — faithfully encoding the user’s parameters, boundary conditions, and solver
settings without manual intervention. To evaluate this, we perform a block-by-block structural comparison atT= 450 K
with 15 V oronoi grains, GBEvolution formulation, and a12×12mesh with uniform refinement level 3.
The comparison is computed by a deterministic scoring script (provided in the repository, with its per-block output in
diff_summary.json) that parses each file into its top-level blocks, extracts the key–value parameter pairs of each
block (comments stripped), and classifies every reference block by its number of mismatches against the agent file. A
mismatch is a reference parameter that is either absent from the agent’s block or present with a different value, with
prompt-specified parameters excluded as described above. The block-level classes are defined precisely as:exact
(✓), zero mismatches — every non-prompt reference parameter is reproduced identically;functionally equivalent( ≈),
18

0 5 10 15
̃k human reference (×10−6)
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
15.0
17.5
̃k AutoMOOSE (×10−6)
slope = 1.028
r = 0.9877
median |Δ| = 3.7%
350
375
400
425
450
475
500
525
550
T (K)
Figure 5:Matched-cell parity between AutoMOOSE-generated and human-reference runs.Across 14 matched
grain-count/temperature cells, the agent-generated and human kinetic outputs agree closely (slope 1.023, Pearson
r= 0.9887 , median absolute deviation 3.4%), confirming that structural fidelity carries through to functionally
equivalent simulation output.
exactly one mismatch — a single non-prompt parameter differs in a way that does not change the simulated physics (for
example a postprocessor reordering or a visualization-only output flag); andphysically valid difference( ×), two or
more mismatches that nonetheless correspond to a legitimate alternative configuration (for example a different but valid
preconditioner). The third class is reserved for differences that a domain expert would accept as correct, not for errors;
genuine errors would instead produce a file that fails the --check-input validity gate, which none of the reported
inputs do.
Of 12 structural blocks compared, 6 match exactly, 4 are functionally equivalent with a single minor parameter
difference, and 2 differ in solver and mesh settings, as summarised in Table 9. The complete annotated listing
is provided in Figure S11 (Supplementary Section S9). The six exact matches cover all physics-critical blocks:
[UserObjects], [Materials], [BCs], [AuxVariables], [AuxKernels], and [Modules]. Notably, AutoMOOSE
correctly instantiates GBEvolution with experimentally grounded copper parameters from Schönfelderet al.[ 26]
and registers GrainTracker exclusively as a UserObject — its erroneous duplication in [Postprocessors] is a
well-known source of runtime failure in hand-written MOOSE files that AutoMOOSE avoids by construction. Periodic
boundary conditions are correctly enforced viaauto_direction.
The four approximate matches reflect minor differences with no effect on simulation output: postprocessor
entry reordering, a coarsen_fraction difference ( 0.1 vs. 0.05), and AutoMOOSE’s automatic addition of
exodus = true in [Outputs] to enable microstructure trajectory visualization. The two differing blocks are [Mesh]
and [Executioner]: the mesh correctly uses nx = ny = 12 with uniform_refine = 3 from the prompt rather than the
tutorial’s 44×44 grid, and the executioner autonomously selects ASM preconditioning rather than hypre boomeramg
— both physically valid choices that reflect the prompt specification.
Figure 6 illustrates the exact match for the [UserObjects] block: both files declare identical GrainTracker pa-
rameters; the only difference is grain_num (15 from the prompt vs. 20 in the reference). Grey inline annotations in
Figure S11 trace every parameter directly back toP (Eq. (9)), making prompt-to-input traceability explicit throughout.
The generated file executed without error on the first attempt, indicating that AutoMOOSE’s pre-trained MOOSE
knowledge was sufficient to produce a valid, runnable input file for this case without retrieval-augmented grounding.
3.4.1 Fidelity at scale
The single-file comparison above is illustrative; to test fidelity systematically we analyze it at scale (Table 8). Across
1000 AutoMOOSE-generated inputs spanning the full grain-count and temperature sweep, every one of the 12 top-level
MOOSE blocks is present and well-formed in all 1000 inputs, matching the 100 human reference inputs (structural
completeness 1000/1000 and 100/100). Block-by-blockcontentagreement, measured over 100 matched human–agent
pairs at identical grain count, temperature, and seed, shows that the agent reproduces every physics-determining block
— [Mesh], [UserObjects], [ICs], [Modules], [AuxVariables], [AuxKernels], [Materials], [BCs], and
[Postprocessors] — exactly in all 100 pairs, with [GlobalParams] exact in 80 and approximate in the remainder.
19

Table 8: Input-file fidelity.Top:structural completeness — fraction of inputs in which each block is present and
well-formed — across 1000 AutoMOOSE-generated inputs and 100 human reference inputs.Bottom:block-by-block
content agreement across 100 matched human–agent pairs (same grain count, temperature, seed), scored over non-
prompt parameters only: “exact” = zero mismatched parameters, “approx” = exactly one (functionally equivalent),
“differs” = two or more (physically valid alternative); see Section 3.4 for the full criteria.
Structural completeness (all 12 blocks present & valid)
Setnblocks present blocks valid
AutoMOOSE-generated 1000 12/12 12/12
Human reference 100 12/12 12/12
Content agreement, 100 matched pairs (per block, over 100 pairs)
Block exact approx differs
Mesh, UserObjects, ICs, Modules 100 0 0
AuxVariables, AuxKernels, Materials, BCs 100 0 0
Postprocessors 100 0 0
GlobalParams 80 20 0
Executioner 0 0 100
Outputs 0 0 100
Overall 81.7% 1.7% 16.7%
Finding: the agent reproduces every physics-determining block exactly across all 100 pairs; the only divergences fall in the two
operational blocks (Executioner, Outputs), where no canonical form exists.
Human-written (reference)
[UserObjects]
[voronoi]
type =
PolycrystalVoronoi
grain_num = 20
rand_seed = 42
int_width = 7
[]
[grain_tracker]
type = GrainTracker
threshold = 0.1
compute_halo_maps = true
polycrystal_ic_uo = voronoi
[]
[]
AutoMOOSE-generated
[UserObjects]
[voronoi]
type =
PolycrystalVoronoi
grain_num = 15 # from
prompt
rand_seed = 42 # from
prompt
int_width = 7
[]
[grain_tracker]
type = GrainTracker
threshold = 0.1
compute_halo_maps = true
polycrystal_ic_uo = voronoi
[]
[]
Figure 6:Input file fidelity: [UserObjects] block (✓ exact structural match).Human-written expert reference
(left) and AutoMOOSE-generated file forT= 450 K (right). Both files declare identical [UserObjects] structure; the
sole difference is grain_num (20 in the reference vs. 15 from the prompt, annotated in grey). The complete 12-block
comparison is in Figure S11.
The only systematic divergences fall in the two purely operational blocks, [Executioner] and [Outputs], for which
no canonical form exists and where the agent’s autonomous choices (preconditioner, output cadence) are themselves
valid. This separation is the key point: structural fidelity (presence and well-formedness) and content fidelity (agreement
with a human expert) are both complete on the physics-bearing blocks, while the agent retains latitude only where
latitude is appropriate. Functional and physical correctness is established independently by the benchmark (Section 3.2)
and the Skeptic (Section 3.7); here matched-cell parity of the resulting kinetics (Fig. 5) confirms that this input fidelity
carries through to equivalent simulation output.
20

Table 9:Block-by-block input file comparisonbetween the expert reference [ 9] and the AutoMOOSE-generated
file (T= 450 K, 15 V oronoi grains,12×12 mesh). ✓: exact match;≈: functionally equivalent, minor difference;×:
differs from reference (physically valid; see text). Full annotated listing: Figure S11.
Block Key parameter / setting Human AutoMOOSE
[Mesh] nx/ny=44 vs. 12;
uniform_refine
✓×
[GlobalParams] op_num=8 vs. 15;
var_name_base
✓≈
[UserObjects] PolycrystalVoronoi +
GrainTracker
✓ ✓
[ICs] PolycrystalColoringIC✓ ✓
[Modules] GrainGrowthphase-field module✓ ✓
[AuxVariables] bnds , unique_grains,
var_indices
✓ ✓
[AuxKernels] BndsCalcAux ,
FeatureFloodCountAux
✓ ✓
[Materials] GBEvolution, Cu params [26]✓ ✓
[BCs] Periodicx,y viaauto_direction✓ ✓
[Postprocessors] TimestepSize , NumDOFs,
NumElements
✓≈
[Executioner] PJFNK;hyprevs. ASM✓×
[Outputs] csv ; AutoMOOSE adds
exodus=true
✓≈
Summary6✓4≈2×/ 12 blocks
3.5 Grain Growth Kinetics
Having established that AutoMOOSE generates physically correct input files (Section 3.4), we now examine the
simulation output. Grain growth kinetics are analysed across all four temperatures and benchmarked against the
physics-matched human-written reference runs introduced in Section 3: a separately constructed set matched to the
AutoMOOSE case in mesh (12×12 , refinement level 3), grain count (N0 = 15), and physical parameters — distinct
from the tutorial reference used in Section 3.4, which used a coarser 44×44 mesh. The two runs differ only in
V oronoi initial conditions (rand_seed= 42 for AutoMOOSE; rand_seed∈{10,30} for the human-written runs)
and minor solver settings. Distinct seeds are used deliberately: because AutoMOOSE selects its seed autonomously
from the prompt, using the same seed for the reference would conflate the agent’s input file choices with the initial
microstructure effect. The comparison instead tests whether both approaches recover consistent macroscopic kinetics
across statistically independent V oronoi realisations of the same physical system.
In two dimensions, classical grain growth theory predicts parabolic coarsening [23],
¯d 2(t)− ¯d 2
0 =k(T)t,(19)
where ¯d(t) is the mean grain diameter and k(T) a temperature-dependent rate constant. Since N(t) is inversely
proportional to ¯d 2 in a fixed-area domain ( ¯d∝N −1/2), Eq. (19) recasts into the linear form fitted directly by f5
(equivalent to the coarsening law of Eq. (6)):
N−1(t)−N −1
0 = ˜k(T)t,
where ˜k(T) is extracted via linear regression ofN−1 againstt. This formulation is physically equivalent to Eq. (19)
and computationally convenient:N(t)is a directGrainTrackeroutput requiring no post-processing.
The microstructural origin of this coarsening is captured in the AutoMOOSE-generated phase-field trajectories. Figure 7
shows the T= 450 K grain structure at four time points, illustrating how curvature-driven boundary migration
progressively eliminates high-curvature interfaces. The grain highlighted by the dashed circle shrinks steadily and
vanishes by panel (iv), consistent with the Gibbs–Thomson relation governing boundary velocity in the GBEvolution
model.
Figure 8a–b shows N(t) for the AutoMOOSE-generated and human-written runs respectively, both starting from
N0 = 15 V oronoi grains on a12×12 mesh under periodic boundary conditions. In both cases the grain count decreases
monotonically at T≥450 K, with higher temperatures driving faster coarsening as expected from the Arrhenius
mobility in the GBEvolution model. At T= 300 K the grain count remains constant at N= 15 throughout the
21

(i) (ii) (iii) (iv)
Figure 7:AutoMOOSE-generated microstructure evolution atT= 450 K.Panels (i)–(iv): phase-field grain structure
att= 0 , 500, 2000, and 4000 ns; grains colored by unique index ( GrainTracker). The grain in the dashed circle
shrinks from panel (i) and vanishes by panel (iv), consistent with the Gibbs–Thomson relation in the GBEvolution
model. Grain count reduces fromN 0 = 15toN f = 13(Figure 8a). No user intervention was required.
Table 10:Grain coarsening fit parametersfrom linear regression of N−1(t) (Eq. (6)). Nf : final grain count at
t= 4000ns.T= 300K excluded: Arrhenius-suppressed (N= const).
AutoMOOSE Human-written
T(K)N f ˜k(×10 −6 ns−1)R 2 Nf ˜k(×10 −6 ns−1)R 2
300 15 suppressed 15 suppressed
450 132.863 0.749132.850 0.750
600 623.51 0.898718.40 0.804
750 358.67 0.951443.46 0.922
4000 ns window in both runs, confirming Arrhenius suppression of grain boundary mobility — an independent physical
consistency check reproduced correctly by both approaches.
Byt= 4000 ns, AutoMOOSE reaches N450 = 13,N600 = 6, and N750 = 3, while the human-written runs yield
N450 = 13,N600 = 7, andN750 = 4. The exact agreement atT= 450 K and modest divergence at higher temperatures
reflects the increasing sensitivity of coarsening to the initial grain size distribution as the number of grains decreases.
Linear regression of N−1(t) againstt yields the rate constants in Table 10: AutoMOOSE agrees with the human
reference to within 0.5% atT= 450 K, where initial condition effects are minimal, and diverges by 22–26% at higher
temperatures due to different V oronoi tessellations — a stochastic variability intrinsic to the small-system statistics
rather than any agent error. These rate constants are carried forward to the Arrhenius analysis in Section 3.6.
3.6 Arrhenius Analysis and Consistency Check
The rate constants{˜k(Ti)} of Section 3.5 enable a direct test of whether AutoMOOSE-generated simulations faithfully
recover the thermal physics encoded in GBEvolution. Because ˜k(T)∝M(T) and the grain boundary mobility
follows the Arrhenius relation (Eq. (5)), linear regression ofln ˜kagainstT −1,
ln ˜k(T) = lnA− Qfit
kB
· 1
T,(20)
should recover the inputQ= 0.23 eV [26]. We perform this regression for both the AutoMOOSE and human-written
runs usingT= 450,600, and750K (T= 300K excluded: mobility is Arrhenius-suppressed).
Figures 8c–d show the Arrhenius plots for both sets; in both cases the three data points fall on a straight line, confirming
excellent linearity across the active temperature range. AutoMOOSE yields Qfit = 0.296 eV (R2 = 0.994) and the
human-written reference yieldsQfit = 0.267 eV (R2 = 0.996), both consistent in direction and magnitude with the
expected activation energy for Cu grain boundary migration [26] (Table 11).
The ∆Qfit = 0.029 eV difference between the two runs traces directly to the kinetics of Section 3.5: the two runs
agree to within 0.5% in ˜k atT= 450 K, where sensitivity to the initial microstructure is minimal, but diverge by
22–26% atT= 600 and 750 K, where distinct random seeds produce different grain size distributions and coarsening
rates. This seed-driven variability shifts the Arrhenius slope modestly, fully accounting for the inter-run difference in
Qfit. Different seeds were used by design: identical seeds would produce identical initial microstructures, conflating
22

(a) Kinetics — AutoMOOSE (b) Kinetics — Human-written
(c) Arrhenius — AutoMOOSE (d) Arrhenius — Human-written
Figure 8:Grain growth kinetics and Arrhenius analysis: AutoMOOSE vs. human-written reference. (a)Au-
toMOOSE N(t) (rand_seed= 42 ); circles, dashed lines: 1/N linear fit (Eq. (6)).(b)Human-written N(t)
(rand_seed∈{10,30} ); squares.(c)AutoMOOSE Arrhenius plot; Qfit = 0.296 eV ,R2 = 0.994 .(d)Human-
written Arrhenius plot;Qfit = 0.267 eV ,R2 = 0.996. Both sets: 12×12 mesh,N0 = 15, refinement level 3, copper
GBEvolution parameters (Q= 0.23 eV [26]). Colors: T= 300 K (navy), 450 K (vivid blue), 600 K (deep orange),
750K (amber).
Table 11:Arrhenius fit summary. Qfit from the slope of ln ˜k vs.T−1 (Eq. (20));T= 450 , 600, 750 K only. Input:
Q= 0.23eV [26].
Quantity AutoMOOSE Human-written
Slope(−Q fit/kB)(K)−3,436−3,095
Qfit (eV)0.296 0.267
InputQ(eV)0.230
R2 0.994 0.996
numerical equivalence with physical agreement; the chosen seeds instead provide statistically independent realizations
of the same probability distribution, offering a more realistic test of pipeline robustness. The residual offset from
Q= 0.23 eV present in both runs reflects a finite-size effect in the 15-grain system; as shown next, an ensemble
campaign over a range of system sizes resolves this offset and converges the recovered activation energy onto the input
value, identifying the single-seed result here as a finite-size-inflated worked example.
The close Arrhenius linearity ( R2 >0.99 for both) and small inter-run spread ( ∆Qfit = 0.029 eV) confirm that
AutoMOOSE-generated simulations reproduce the thermally activated physics of the GBEvolution model at a level
statistically comparable to expert-authored inputs within stochastic and finite-size variability to expert-authored inputs,
without any manual parameter tuning.
23

1.8 2.0 2.2 2.4 2.6 2.8
1000 / T (K−1)
-14.0
-13.5
-13.0
-12.5
-12.0
-11.5
-11.0
-10.5ln ̃k
AutoMOOSE N0=100
AutoMOOSE N0=200
AutoMOOSE N0=500 (res-lim.)
human reference N0=100
human reference N0=200
Figure 9:Ensemble Arrhenius analysis over the 1000 AutoMOOSE / 100 human-written runs.Per-temperature
ensemble-mean rate constants ˜k(T) (mean± standard error over admissible seeds) for the converged grain-count
ensembles, with the standard-error-weighted Arrhenius fit of ln ˜k against 1/T . The fit recovers the input activation
energy within statistical uncertainty.
0.00 0.01 0.02 0.03 0.04 0.05 0.06 0.07
1 / N0
0.16
0.18
0.20
0.22
0.24
0.26
0.28
0.30Qfit (eV)
input Q = 0.230 eV
human reference
AutoMOOSE
15-grain system
(0.267-0.296)
Figure 10:Finite-size dependence of the recovered activation energy. Qfit as a function of initial grain countN0:
the recovered value decreases from the finite-size-inflated small-system estimate toward a plateau at large N0. An
inverse-variance fit over the converged sizes (N0≤200 ) gives Q∞ = 0.228 eV against the input Q= 0.230 eV;
N0 = 500is resolution-limited (6.5 cells per grain) and excluded from the fit.
24

3.6.1 Ensemble convergence of the activation energy
The single-seed comparison above is a worked example; its residual offset from the input Q motivates a statistical
campaign that removes both seed variability and finite-size bias. We generate 1000 AutoMOOSE runs spanning five
initial grain counts N0∈{20,50,100,200,500} and five temperatures{350,400,450,500,550} K with up to 40
independent seeds per cell, on a fixed 1000×1000 box with a 1282 periodic mesh, alongside 100 human-written
runs (four sizes× five temperatures× five seeds). Each trajectory is fit to 1/N(t) = 1/N0 +kt under pre-registered
admissibility gates (coarsening to≤0.60N 0, at least five resolved levels and six fit points,R2≥0.90 ); a temperature
cell enters the Arrhenius fit only if at least 60% of its seeds are admissible and at least five are valid, and each accepted
point is an ensemble mean with its standard error. Standard-error-weighted Arrhenius regression with bootstrap
confidence intervals is then performed per grain-count ensemble. For the converged sizesN0 = 100 and 200, all five
temperatures clear the yield gate withR 2 >0.999(Fig. 9).
The recovered activation energy depends systematically on system size (Fig. 10):Qfit is inflated for small ensembles —
reproducing the 0.27–0.30 eV range of the single-seed worked example — and decreases toward a plateau asN0 grows,
with the converged ensembles sitting at 0.232–0.236 eV . An inverse-variance fit over the converged sizes (N0≤200 )
yields Q∞ = 0.228 eV against the input Q= 0.230 eV , a0.9% agreement; the largest ensemble, N0 = 500 , is
resolution-limited at 6.5 cells per grain and is excluded from the fit. That the autonomously generated simulations
recover the input activation energy to within1% once finite-size bias is removed is the framework’s primary quantitative
validation, and it identifies the earlier single-seed 0.296 eV as the expected finite-size-inflated estimate rather than a
discrepancy.
3.7 Failure Detection and Recovery
Reliability in AutoMOOSE comes from two distinct mechanisms acting at different stages: the Reviewer’s completion-
aware execution screen (Section 2.6), which catches inputs that cannot run, and the Skeptic’s physics-grounded
falsification (Section 2.8), which catches runs that complete but are physically wrong. We describe both here, and the
closed-loop recovery module that builds on them.
3.7.1 Execution-screen catches during plugin development
Three classes of input-level defect surfaced during initial GrainGrowth plugin development and were caught by the
execution screen before any physically meaningless result could propagate (Table 12). Each illustrates the structural
property of MOOSE error messages that makes automated root-cause attribution tractable.
3.7.2 Class I: DuplicateUserObjectdeclaration.
The initial plugin registered GrainTracker in both [UserObjects] (correct) and [Postprocessors] (erroneous
duplication), causing MOOSE’s object registry to raise:
A GrainTracker ‘grain_tracker’ already exists.
You may not add a Postprocessor by the same name.
The execution screen identified the duplicate declaration; removing the [Postprocessors] entry restored a runnable
input. All four sweep runs failed on the first attempt and ran on the second.
3.7.3 Class II: Duplicate solver parameter
The Executioner sub-agent emitted solve_type = PJFNK twice — once from the base template and once from the
preconditioner branch — causing a duplicate key error at input validation. Deduplicating the sub-agent output template
resolved all four runs.
3.7.4 Class III: Unused parameter abort
The [Outputs] block contained an interval parameter not recognised by the installed MOOSE version, which aborts
by default with:
unused parameter ‘Outputs/exodus/interval’
Removing the parameter restored Exodus output with no change to physics or solver settings.
25

Table 12:Input-level defects caught by the execution screenduring GrainGrowth plugin development. Each defect
produces an unambiguous MOOSE error signature, and each correction is a single re-generation plus re-execution.
Class Error Root cause Correction
I Duplicate object name in
registry
GrainTracker declared in
both [UserObjects] and
[Postprocessors]
Remove
[Postprocessors]
entry
II Duplicate key in
[Executioner]
solve_type=PJFNK emitted
twice by Executioner sub-agent
Deduplicate output
template
III Unused parameter abortinterval not recognised in
[Outputs/exodus]
Remove interval
parameter
3.7.5 Skeptic falsification of benchmark failures
Beyond these input-level catches, the more consequential failures are runs that execute but are physically untrustworthy,
and these are the Skeptic’s domain. On the 25-task benchmark (Section 3.2), the Skeptic falsified exactly the cases
that the gates also failed — the LinearizedInterface and three-dimensional tasks — rather than reporting their
metrics as if valid, and its set of credible runs coincides with the 15/25 full-gate set. Two of these falsifications
traced to systematic generator defects rather than to the physics being modeled: the LinearizedInterface branch
emitted placeholder material constants in place of the copper parameters, and the three-dimensional path inherited
two-dimensional time-stepping too aggressive for the stiffer system. Diagnosed jointly from the solver error signatures
and the Skeptic’s verdicts, both were corrected in the generator — physically grounded copper parameters for the
linearized interface, and a reduced initial step with a stronger preconditioner in three dimensions — and verified by
re-execution. The benchmark thus functions as a diagnostic that drives a falsification-to-fix loop, not merely a pass/fail
score.
3.7.6 Closed-loop recovery module
The recovery module ( recovery.py, Section 2.6) operationalizes this loop for the divergence-class failures: it
consumes the Skeptic’s diagnosis, applies a bounded time-step correction (Eq. (15)), and regenerates and re-executes
through the standard pipeline, accepting a corrected run only if it independently completes and passes the Skeptic.
We validated the classifier against real run logs, confirming that it is completion-aware — a run whose log records
completion is never “corrected” on the basis of a stale running-status record — and that corrections inapplicable to a
given configuration are suppressed. We report the module as implemented and component-validated; failures rooted in
problem formulation rather than time-stepping fall outside its bounded envelope and are surfaced rather than forced.
3.8 The Value of Task Decomposition: Pipeline versus a Single Non-Decomposed Agent
A natural question is how much of AutoMOOSE’s reliability comes from the task-decomposed agentic workflow rather
than from the capability of the underlying language model. We are careful about what this comparison is and is not.
AutoMOOSE is not merely “more agents” than a baseline: it is a task-decomposed workflow in which specialized
agents own distinct stages of the simulation lifecycle — input generation, parameter handling, execution, completion
screening, falsification, recovery, and result extraction. A single general-purpose agent prompted to perform the entire
lifecycle in one call (our baseline, a single generic agent given the task and the MOOSE executable and documentation
but no role specialization) can attempt only the first of these stages, input generation; it has no mechanism to screen
its own run for completion, to adversarially falsify its own result, or to recover from a divergence. The comparison is
therefore not a like-for-like end-to-end race — a non-decomposed agent does not reach the later stages at all — but an
isolation of what decomposition buys at the one stage both configurations attempt.
For that reason we score the baseline on the objective G1 gate (does the generated input parse and run under
--check-input) over the eight core grain-growth tasks: G1 is precisely the stage a single generic agent can at-
tempt. The identical modeling task is posed to each bare frontier model with no scaffolding, and because direct model
output is stochastic, each condition is repeated over independent runs and reported as a mean with range (Table 13).
The full AutoMOOSE pipeline produces valid input in 8/8 tasks on every invocation, with zero run-to-run variance.
The bare models are both lower and stochastic: the strongest, Claude Opus 4.8, averages 5.0/8 (range 3–7); the mid-tier
Claude Sonnet 4.6 averages 0.3/8 strict; and GPT-4o produces 0/8 in every run, with genuine structural errors rather
than near-misses. Two conclusions follow. First, because the plugin dominates every model and every run, the advantage
is attributable to the scaffolding rather than to any single model’s idiosyncrasies. Second, the determinism is itself a
26

contribution: direct prompting cannot offer the reproducibility that a deterministic generator provides, independent of
accuracy. We are careful about scope: the G1 gate measures input validity, while functional and physical correctness
are established separately by the benchmark (Section 3.2) and the Skeptic (Section 3.7).
The value of the decomposition is not, however, captured by G1 alone, because the stages a single generic agent cannot
attempt are exactly where the remaining specialized agents act, and each is independently evidenced in this paper. The
Reviewer’s completion screen flags the runs that execute but fail to advance (the failed runs of Section 3.7); the Skeptic
falsifies results that pass execution but violate physics, ablated as its own stage in Section 3.9; the recovery module
corrects divergence-class failures through a bounded time-step cutback; and end-to-end completion across the full
lifecycle is quantified by the 25-task benchmark (19 of 25 run, 15 of 25 credible, Section 3.2) and the agreement with
the expert-written reference (Section 3.4). We therefore do not claim that multi-agent design is universally superior
to a single agent; we claim the narrower and better-supported point that, for this multi-stage simulation workflow,
task-specialized agents enable modular execution, targeted validation, and error recovery across lifecycle steps that a
single non-decomposed agent does not reliably complete.
Table 13: Ablation and baseline comparison on n=8 core grain-growth tasks, scored on G1 (input validity via
--check-input).AutoMOOSEis the deterministic plugin (identical output on every invocation);rawconditions
prompt the bare model directly with the same task and no plugin scaffolding, repeated across independent runs to
characterize stochasticity (ranges shown).Strictrequires a clean parse;lenient( --allow-unused) ignores deprecated-
but-harmless parameters, matching the checking applied to AutoMOOSE’s own benchmark runs. The frontier models
the reviewer named were used (Claude Opus 4.8, exceeding the requested Opus 4.7+); GPT-5.x was not API-accessible
at the time of testing, so GPT-4o is reported.
Condition G1 strict G1 lenient
Raw entries: mean (min–max) over 3 independent runs.
AutoMOOSE plugin8/8 8/8
raw Opus 4.8 (claude-opus-4-8) 5.0 (3–7)/8 5.3 (3–8)/8
raw Sonnet 4.6 (claude-sonnet-4-6) 0.3 (0–1)/8 2.0 (1–3)/8
raw GPT-4o (gpt-4o) 0/8 0/8
3.9 Skeptic Falsification as Methodology
The baseline above measures raw generation; the Skeptic addresses the complementary and, we argue, more important
question of whether a completed result should bebelieved. Running the Skeptic over the full benchmark yields a natural
ablation of the verification stage: of the runs that execute and report well-formed metrics, the Skeptic admits exactly the
15/25 that satisfy the physics invariants and falsifies the remainder, including runs that complete but violate parabolic
scaling or fail in three dimensions. Without this stage, those clean-but-wrong runs would enter the downstream analysis
with plausible numbers attached; with it, only physically credible results are reported.
This is a methodological contribution distinct from raw model capability. The Skeptic reframes the final stage of the
pipeline from an engineering task (generate, run, parse) to an epistemic one (propose, execute,falsify), and the reliability
it confers does not come from a stronger model but from testing each result against the physical laws it must obey. The
same adversarial stage carries across domains unchanged: the conserved-dynamics invariants of the Fe–Cr spinodal run
(Section 3.3) are simply a different battery dispatched by the same falsification machinery. Verification grounded in
physics, rather than in model confidence, is what makes the framework’s outputs trustworthy.
3.10 Agent-Narrated Interpretation
Completing the pipeline, the Visualization agent (f5) generates a natural-language scientific interpretation of each
completed simulation alongside the numerical metrics, grounding the quantitative results in established theory and
flagging physically significant deviations. This narration is produced by a structured API call that receives the parsed
simulation metrics — grain-count trajectory, coarsening fit parameters, and DOF statistics — and generates a concise
expert-level interpretation without any user-authored prompt. Thef5 narrative for theT= 450 K run is reproduced
verbatim below.
The grain growth simulation at 450 K demonstrates limited coarsening kinetics, with grain count
reducing from 15 to 13 (13.3% reduction) over 4000 ns. The coarsening law fitting yields a reasonable
correlation (R2 = 0.749) with a rate constant˜k= 2.863×10−6 ns−1, indicating moderate adherence
27

to classical grain growth kinetics. The low rate constant reflects limited grain boundary mobility at
this temperature, consistent with thermally activated migration governed by the Arrhenius relation.
The modest deviation from ideal linear behaviour (R2 <0.9 ) likely reflects grain size distribution
effects and topological constraints in the small 15-grain system.
Across all four temperatures,f5 correctly identifies coarsening kinetics atT≥450 K, attributes the zero coarsening at
T= 300 K to Arrhenius suppression rather than a numerical artefact, and reportsQfit = 0.296 eV from the three active
temperatures — consistent with the manual Arrhenius analysis of Section 3.6. This capability transforms AutoMOOSE
from a simulation execution tool into a self-interpreting scientific instrument, lowering the expertise barrier for users
unfamiliar with phase-field kinetics and providing an auditable record of physical reasoning alongside every numerical
result.
4 Discussion
4.1 Agentic Decomposition Versus Single-Turn Prompting
The six-agent decomposition adopted in AutoMOOSE reflects the design principle thatreliability scales with speciali-
sation. A single agent tasked with simultaneously parsing intent, generating mesh parameters, writing a MOOSE input
file, executing the solver, and interpreting results would face an informationally overloaded context window and a task
space that conflates physically distinct subtasks. By contrast, each AutoMOOSE agent holds a minimal, well-scoped
system prompt (100–300 tokens) focused on a single pipeline stage (Eq. (8)).
The Reviewer agent (f4) illustrates the value of this decomposition most clearly: it is the only agent with access to the
full MOOSE error log, and its system prompt encodes a structured taxonomy of common failure modes — duplicate
declarations, unused parameters, solver divergence, mesh incompatibility — that would be diluted into irrelevance in a
shared monolithic prompt. The three input-level defects caught by the execution screen in Section 3.7 confirm that
focused context enables reliable root-cause attribution from MOOSE error messages.
This architecture also enables progressive automation at arbitrary depth. Researchers can intercept the pipeline at
any stage through the chat interface, overriding agent decisions while delegating the remainder: a user who wishes
to manually author the mesh block but delegate the rest can do so by intercepting afterf2; a user who supplies their
own .i file but wants agent post-processing can enter atf3. Thishuman-in-the-loop at arbitrary depthproperty — a
direct consequence of the modular pipeline structure — is not achievable with monolithic single-turn approaches and
substantially lowers the adoption barrier for partial integration into existing MOOSE workflows.
4.2 Physical Validity and Pipeline Consistency
A necessary condition for any simulation automation framework is that it produces physically correct results, and not
merely syntactically valid inputs. AutoMOOSE establishes this at several complementary levels of stringency.
At the level of aggregate capability, the 25-task benchmark (Section 3.2) shows that the agent generates valid input for
every task and produces fully credible runs — passing quantitative Burke–Turnbull kinetics and surviving independent
Skeptic falsification — in 15 of 25, with failures confined to two diagnosable generator defects rather than scattered
across regimes. The Skeptic’s falsification battery (Section 2.8) is what makes this a test of physical correctness rather
than mere execution: completed runs that violate the physics are flagged, not reported.
At the level of quantitative physics, the ensemble campaign (Section 3.6) recovers the input activation energy to within
1% (Q∞ = 0.228 eV against 0.230 eV) once finite-size bias is removed across system sizes. The single-seed worked
example —Qfit = 0.296 eV , an end-to-end consistency check from user-specified parameters through the phase-field
bridge, MOOSE execution, and macroscopic kinetics extraction (Table 11) — illustrates the pipeline transparently; its
residual offset is the expected finite-size effect in a 15-grain system, resolved by the ensemble, not an agent error.
Finally, generalization is established on a second, conserved-dynamics domain: the Fe–Cr spinodal run satisfies the
exact mass-conservation and free-energy-dissipation laws to a stated tolerance and separates toward the equilibrium
tie-line (Section 3.3). To our knowledge, no prior LLM-based simulation assistant provides this combination of
pre-registered benchmarking, physics-grounded falsification, and exact-conservation verification across two distinct
phase-field domains.
28

4.3 Role of Pre-trained Knowledge Versus Retrieval Augmentation
A deliberate architectural choice in AutoMOOSE is the absence of retrieval-augmented generation (RAG). The Architect
and Input Writer agents rely entirely on pre-trained MOOSE knowledge embedded in the underlying language model,
without access to MOOSE documentation or example files at inference time. The input file fidelity results (Section 3.4)
confirm that this is sufficient for the GBEvolution grain growth formulation: across 100 matched human–agent pairs the
agent reproduces every physics-determining block exactly, with divergences confined to the two purely operational
blocks ([Executioner], [Outputs]); in the representative single-file comparison, 6 of 12 structural blocks match the
human-written reference exactly and 4 more are functionally equivalent, and the generated file executes correctly on the
first attempt after plugin validation.
This approach has clear limits, however. MOOSE is a large, actively developed framework with hundreds of physics
modules, many of which post-date the language model’s training cutoff or are insufficiently represented in public
training corpora. For less common physics — electrochemistry, contact mechanics, reactor neutronics — pre-trained
knowledge alone is likely insufficient to generate correct input files without retrieval support. A RAG layer over the
MOOSE documentation corpus and official examples repository is therefore the most impactful near-term extension,
scoped as future work in Section 4.6.
4.4 Comparison to Related Approaches
Several recent systems have demonstrated LLM-assisted generation of simulation inputs in adjacent domains. LLM-
MD [34] and related tools [ 35] generate LAMMPS and GROMACS molecular dynamics input files from natural
language, reporting first-attempt success rates of 60–80% on standard benchmarks. MatAgent [36] and AtomAgents [37]
implement multi-agent workflows for DFT calculation setup and materials property prediction. These systems share
a common limitation: they generate a candidate input and return control to the user without closing the execution-
diagnosis-correction loop.
AutoMOOSE differs in three respects. First, beyond the initial prompt it carries a task through the full loop from intent
to quantitative result without further user intervention in the demonstrated benchmark cases, including physics-grounded
falsification of completed runs (Section 2.8), a component-validated recovery module for divergence-class failures
(Section 3.7), and structured provenance capture. Second, it targets continuum phase-field simulation — a domain that
has received substantially less automation attention despite its practical importance for microstructure prediction at the
mesoscale. Third, it exposes all capabilities through the Model Context Protocol (Section 2.11), enabling composability
with external agentic systems including Bayesian optimisation loops and high-throughput screening pipelines. The
closest prior work in the MOOSE ecosystem is a documentation chatbot [38] that answers questions about MOOSE
syntax but does not execute simulations or close the analysis loop.
4.5 Reproducibility as a First-Class Outcome
The computational materials science community has identified reproducibility as a persistent challenge [10]: nominally
identical physical models can produce different results depending on executable version, compiler flags, MPI rank
count, and random seed. AutoMOOSE addresses this at the infrastructure level rather than through documentation
convention. Every run directory is self-documenting by construction: the record.json provenance file encodes the
absolute MOOSE executable path, all simulation parameters, hostname, MPI rank count, wall-clock runtime, and
random seed. Reproducing any run requires only
mpiexec -nN MPI $MOOSE_EXEC -i input.i,
where all three quantities are present in the directory without reference to any external system. This design is directly
aligned with community standards for reproducible computational science [11] and ensures that simulation records
produced by AutoMOOSE satisfy the FAIR data principles at the level of the individual run.
4.6 Limitations and Future Directions
Several limitations of the current framework point directly to concrete extensions, which we group below by the
component they most affect.
4.6.1 RAG over MOOSE documentation
The Input Writer agent relies on the pre-trained MOOSE knowledge of the underlying LLM. For well-established blocks
(Kernels, BCs, Materials) this performs reliably, but recently-added MOOSE objects or non-standard formulations
29

are susceptible to hallucination of plausible but incorrect parameter names. A RAG layer backed by a vector store
and exposed via a lookup_moose_docs MCP tool is the planned integration point for this capability, requiring only a
single tool registration in the existing server.
4.6.2 Extended recovery policy
The current recovery module (Section 3.7) acts on divergence-class failures through a bounded time-step correction.
For novel or composite failure modes, a staged recovery policy — timestep cutback → mesh refinement→ solver
fallback — consuming the Skeptic’s diagnosis could address a broader range of convergence failures without human
intervention; extending recovery beyond the time-stepping channel, and validating the full closed loop on genuine
numerical breakdowns at scale, is a direct line of future work.
4.6.3 Extended physics coverage
Spinodal decomposition (conserved Cahn–Hilliard) is fully implemented and validated end-to-end (Sections 2.10
and 3.3), demonstrating that the plugin contract generalizes across non-conserved and conserved dynamics. Ferroelectric
switching and solidification remain registered as plugin stubs in the current release; full activation requires only validated
generate_inputandparse_resultsimplementations, with no modification to the orchestration layer.
4.6.4 Active learning and autonomous discovery
The most scientifically compelling near-term extension couples AutoMOOSE to a Bayesian optimisation loop for
autonomous parameter exploration. In this workflow, an external optimisation agent calls run_simulation with
proposed parameters, receives structured results via get_results, and updates its surrogate model — enabling largely
autonomous characterisation of the ˜k(T) surface over a multi-dimensional parameter space{Q,M 0,γ GB,w GB} once
the search bounds are specified. This coupling is a planned extension rather than a demonstrated capability of the
present work.
5 Conclusion
We introduced AutoMOOSE, an open-source agentic framework that automates the full lifecycle of MOOSE phase-field
simulation — from natural-language intent to quantitatively validated results — without manual file editing or direct
solver interaction. The framework deploys a six-agent, model-agnostic pipeline in which language-model agents handle
intent parsing, input-file generation, parallel execution, completion-aware execution screening, and result interpretation,
and in which a physics-grounded Skeptic adversarially tests every completed run against the physical laws it must
satisfy — all coordinated through a Model Context Protocol server that exposes ten structured simulation tools.
The central result is that the framework producesverifiedsimulations, not merely executed ones. On a pre-registered
25-task grain-growth benchmark with machine-checkable gates and independent Skeptic falsification, AutoMOOSE
generates valid input for all 25 tasks and yields 15 fully credible runs, with failures localized to two diagnosable
generator defects that the benchmark itself surfaced. An ensemble campaign across system sizes recovers the input
activation energy to within1% (Q∞ = 0.228 eV against 0.230 eV) once finite-size bias is removed, with the single-seed
Qfit = 0.296 eV retained as an illustrative worked example of that bias. Generalization is demonstrated on a second,
conserved-dynamics domain: an agent-generated Fe–Cr Cahn–Hilliard simulation satisfies the governing conservation
and dissipation laws to a stated tolerance and relaxes to the correct equilibrium tie-line — exact physical laws verified
rather than asserted. A controlled ablation confirms that this reliability comes from the scaffolding rather than any
single model: the deterministic pipeline produces valid input in 8 of 8 tasks every invocation, where the strongest bare
model manages only 3–7 of 8, unpredictably. Block-level analysis shows the generated inputs match human-written
references on every physics-determining block, with differences confined to operational choices that carry no canonical
form. Three classes of input-level defect encountered during plugin development were caught by the execution screen,
and divergence-class failures are handled by a component-validated closed-loop recovery module.
Three contributions distinguish AutoMOOSE from prior LLM-assisted simulation tools. First, in the demonstrated
benchmark cases it closes the automation loop — from prompt to quantitative result — including execution, runtime
monitoring, component-validated failure recovery, and kinetics extraction, without returning control to the user at any
intermediate stage. Second, it provides structured, physics-grounded self-verification through the Skeptic’s falsification
battery, establishing a reproducible standard for assessing pipeline physical correctness that is independent of the specific
LLM version or prompt formulation used. Third, the MCP interface enables composability with external agentic systems,
including Bayesian optimisation loops and high-throughput screening pipelines for processing–microstructure–property
database construction.
30

Looking ahead, retrieval-augmented generation over the MOOSE documentation corpus will reduce dependence on
pre-trained syntax knowledge and extend reliable input generation to the full breadth of MOOSE physics modules.
Building on the validated spinodal plugin, full activation of the remaining registered stubs — ferroelectric switching
and solidification — requires only validated plugin implementations within the existing orchestration layer. Coupling
to active learning algorithms is intended to support largely autonomous exploration of multi-dimensional parameter
spaces, and integration with HPC job schedulers will enable systematic multi-node scaling studies.
More broadly, AutoMOOSE demonstrates that the gap betweenknowingthe physics anddoingthe physics can now be
bridged by a lightweight multi-agent orchestration layer built on top of a mature simulation framework. As language
model capabilities continue to advance and agentic infrastructure matures, frameworks of this kind will become standard
components of computational materials science workflows — shifting the productivity bottleneck from input file
authorship to the scientifically more valuable tasks of experimental design, result interpretation, and physical insight.
AutoMOOSE is released as open-source software to support this transition.
Author contributions.S.M. conceived and implemented the AutoMOOSE framework, designed the agent architecture
and benchmark, performed the simulations and analysis, and wrote the manuscript. H.C. contributed to the validation
design and reviewed the manuscript. S.S. supervised the project, contributed to the conceptual design, and reviewed
and edited the manuscript. All authors approved the final version.
Conflicts of interest.There are no conflicts of interest to declare.
Code availability.AutoMOOSE is released under the MIT License and is publicly available at
https://github.com/sukritimanna/AutoMOOSE. The repository provides the complete source code, including the
GrainGrowth and spinodal-decomposition plugins, the evaluation set and scoring runner, example run directories with
record.json provenance files, and comprehensive documentation hosted athttps://automoose.readthedocs.io.
Data availability.The data supporting this article — including the benchmark evaluation set, per-task scoring outputs,
the seed-campaign aggregates, and the run records ( record.json provenance files) for all reported results — are
available in the AutoMOOSE repository at https://github.com/sukritimanna/AutoMOOSE. A versioned archive
will be deposited in a public repository (Zenodo) upon acceptance, and the DOI will be provided in the final version.
Use of AI tools.During preparation of this manuscript, the authors used ChatGPT / GPT-5.5 Thinking for language
editing, organization, and clarity improvement. The authors reviewed and edited all AI-assisted text and take full
responsibility for the content of the manuscript.
Acknowledgement:This work was supported by DOE Office of Science, Basic Energy Science under the AI-Pathfinder
project. Work performed at the Center for Nanoscale Materials, a U.S. Department of Energy Office of Science User
Facility, was supported by the U.S. DOE, Office of Basic Energy Sciences, under Contract No. DE-AC02-06CH11357.
This work utilized the National Energy Research Scientific Computing Center, a DOE Office of Science User Facility
supported by the Office of Science of the US Department of Energy under Contract No. DE-AC02-05CH11231. We
also acknowledge the LCRC computing facilities at Argonne.
