record_id: survey_refs:openreview:eONq7FdiHa:190
source_used: arxiv_pdf
fetched_url: https://arxiv.org/pdf/2504.03767
fetched_title: MCP Safety Audit: LLMs with the Model Context Protocol Allow Major Security Exploits
fetched_at: 2026-09-18T19:00:31Z

Preprint. Under review.
MCP Safety Audit: LLMs with the Model Context Protocol
Allow Major Security Exploits
Brandon Radosevich∗
John T. Halloran∗
Leidos
halloranjt@leidos.com
Abstract
To reduce development overhead and enable seamless integration between
potential components comprising any given generative AI application,
the Model Context Protocol (MCP) (Anthropic, 2025d) has recently been
released and, subsequently, widely adapted. The MCP is an open proto-
col which standardizes API calls to large language models (LLMs), data
sources, and agentic tools. Thus, by connecting multiple MCP servers–each
defined with a set of tools, resources, and prompts–users are able to define
automated workflows fully driven by LLMs. However, we show that the
current MCP design carries a wide range of security risks for end-users.
In particular, we show that industry-leading LLMs may be coerced to use
MCP tools and compromise an AI developer’s system through a wide
range of attacks, e.g., malicious code execution, remote access control, and
credential theft. In order to proactively mitigate the demonstrated (and
related) attacks, we introduce a safety auditing tool, McpSafetyScanner, the
first such agentic tool to assess the security of an arbitrary MCP server.
McpSafetyScanner uses several agents to: a) automatically determine ad-
versarial samples given an MCP server’s tools and resources, (b) search
for related vulnerabilities and remediations given such samples, and (c)
generate a security report detailing all findings. Our work thus sheds light
on serious security issues with general purpose agentic workflows, while
also providing a proactive tool to audit the safety of MCP servers and
address detected vulnerabilities prior to deployment.
The described MCP server auditing tool, MCPSafetyScanner, is freely avail-
able at: https://github.com/johnhalloran321/mcpSafetyScanner.
1 Introduction
With the rise of large language models (LLMs) and agentic workflows, AI is being developed
and adapted at unprecedented rates. Anticipating such growth, as well as the ensuing
complexity resulting from AI-powered assistants and services communicating with one
another, Anthropic has recently introduced the Model Context Protocol (MCP) (Anthropic,
2025d). This protocol seeks to integrate LLMs and agents with various external systems and
services in an easily adaptable framework.
Since it’s debut, the MCP has been widely adapted across a large number of commonly
used open-source libraries, e.g., default MCP servers are natively packaged with Claude
Desktop Anthropic (2025a), and official integrations include OpenAI’s Agents (OpenAI,
2025), Copilot (Microsoft, 2025), Stripe (Stripe, 2025), Slack (Anthropic, 2025g), and IBM’s
Watson (IBM, 2025), to name a few. Furthermore, the MCP has garnered significant commu-
nity interest and support; in just four months (at the time of this writing), the official MCP
github repository has accrued over 27k stars (Anthropic, 2025e) and has been forked over
2.8k times. Indeed, as the use of AI agents and AI-powered applications continues to grow,
it is expected that the MCP will similarly continue to grow as a unifying framework for the
∗Equal Contribution
1
arXiv:2504.03767v2 [cs.CR] 11 Apr 2025

Preprint. Under review.
growing AI-based ecoysytem (Forbes, 2025). However, we show that the current design of
the MCP poses significant security risks for users developing generative AI solutions.
Herein, we demonstrate that industry-leading LLMs may be coerced to use tools from
standard MCP servers and directly compromise user systems. In particular, we show that
Claude 3.7 and Llama-3.3-70B may be prompted to use tools from default MCP servers
which allow three different types of attacks: 1) malicious code execution , (2) remote access
control, and (3) credential theft. Furthermore, we introduce a new multi-MCP server attack
which enables both remote access control and credential theft. Through these attacks, bad
actors are able to gain access to an AI developer’s system and/or procure sensitive user
data (e.g., API keys).
With the successful demonstration of all three attacks, we then show that Claude is aware of
the underlying security issues concerning prompts which enable these attacks and refuses
such requests some of the time, but may be coerced to successfully carry out requests
by simple prompt changes. Directly testing the ability of an LLM’s guardrails to prevent
these attacks can thus produce false positives which, in turn, may provide a false sense of
security against such attacks. Thus, we advocate that an LLM’s guardrails1 should not be
solely relied upon for remediation. Rather, remediation should occur through the LLM (via
its guardrails) as well as proactively through the design of the MCP server (via knowledge
of the exploits made possible when an LLM is enabled with an MCP server’s tools and
resources).
To proactively identify exploits for agentic MCP workflows, we introduceMcpSafetyScanner,
the first tool to assess the security of an arbitrary MCP server. Given a particular MCP
server, McpSafetyScanner uses agents to automatically detect system vulnerabilities using
the server’s features (i.e., tools, prompts, and resources), automatically searches knowledge
bases for related vulnerabilities, determines remediations for all vulnerabilities, and pro-
duces a detailed security report for MCP developers. McpSafetyScanner thus allows MCP
developers the ability to easily scan their MCP servers for vulnerabilities and release
patches for exploits using returned remediations.
We show that, for the standard MCP servers which enable our demonstrated attacks,
McpSafetyScanner is able to correctly identify these vulnerabilities, provide standard exam-
ples of these attacks, and remediations (as well as guardrail best-practices).
2 Background
2.1 Need for Standardized Generative AI APIs
Currently, the generative AI landscape consists of a wide range of custom APIs tailored
towards specific goals and targeted solutions. E.g., for retrieval augmented generation
(RAG) alone, widely used solutions include Chroma, LangChain, Haystack, LlamaIndex,
ChatGPT’s retrieval plugin, Huggingface’s retrieval plugin, and Azure’s Machine Learning
pipeline, to name name a few. Furthermore, the aforementioned RAG solutions may
internally call several other generative AI APIs, differing based on the inference/LLMOps
provider (e.g., OpenAI, Azure OpenAI, Together AI, and DataBricks for API endpoints
or local models through Huggingface, Ollama, vLLM, etc.). Such recursive API calls are
inherited by practitioners when developing their own specific applications, who in turn
build their own custom APIs. Thus, while a large number of generative AI solutions exist,
adapting such solutions for a particular use case requires significant developer time and
effort due to the current ad-hoc state of generative AI APIs.
1In this context, we are not only referring to the guardrails enabled through safety fine-tuning
the LLM, i.e., alignment (Grattafiori et al., 2024). Rather, when discussing a closed-source LLM
accessed via a server endpoint (e.g., Claude and GPT-4o), we use the term guardrails to encompass
all facets of the LLM-inference-endpoint’s refusal system, which may include malicious prompt
detectors (Inan et al., 2023) for either the input query or the LLM’s response.
2

Preprint. Under review.
2.2 The Model Context Protocol
The MCP is a streamlined solution to the current unstructured design of generative AI
APIs. At its core, the MCP defines a schema with which client- and server-side services
must structure their requests. Additionally, the MCP consists of an open-source SDK to
enable quick adaptation across popular web-development languages (i.e., Python, Java,
Typescript, and Kotlin). Within the MCP client-serve message schema, requested services
are described as features. Server-to-client (STC) features include resources (i.e., context and
data for the AI model to use), prompts (i.e., templated messages and workflows for users),
and tools (i.e., functions for the AI model to execute). The client-to-service (CTS) may offer
the sampling feature, i.e., server-initiated agentic behaviors and recursive LLM interactions.
By standardizing messages, categorizing STC/CTS requests, and providing a centralized
codebase, developers may quickly integrate open source tooling and projects into their own
Generative AI solutions.
3 The MCP Allows LLMs to Compromise User Systems
As previously noted, we consider the following three types of attacks
1. Malicious code execution (MCE) - an attacker inserts malicious code into a user’s
system files.
2. Remote access control (RAC) - an attacker is immediately granted remote access to
the victim’s system.
3. Credential Theft (CT) - an attacker exploits access to system files or environment
variables, covertly extracting sensitive information from the victim’s system.
Herein, we demonstrate MCE attacks which allow RAC every time the victim opens a new
terminal. We note, however, that general MCE attacks are not limited to this specific end
goal.
Claude. Figure 1 shows successful and unsuccessful MCE attempts by directly prompting
Claude enabled with the MCP filesystem server (described in Table 1). Claude demonstrates
knowledge of the security risks related to an MCE; in Figure 1(a), an MCE attack hidden
in octal-encoded variables triggers Claude’s guardrails, and Claude does not complete the
request while noting the security concerns associated with it. While examples like this
may provide confidence in Claude’s safety guardrails, Figure 1(b) shows a less subversive
version of the attack, where the MCE is written in plaintext. In this case, we can see that
while Claude’s guardrails are partially triggered (noting potential security risks with this
request), Claude completes the request. The backdoor is triggered the next time the MCP
user opens a new terminal (Figure 6 demonstrates the attack in full).
While this specific demonstration has a low threat level in a general setting–as the attacker
requires direct access to the MCP user’s system to directly promptClaude Desktop –the threat
level increases drastically when considering shared-office or communal settings (Willison
& Warkentin, 2013). Furthermore, similar results may be found when directly prompting
for an RAC attack; Figure 8 displays both refused and successful RAC attacks. While the
former (in Figure 8(a) triggers Claude’s guardrails, the latter (in Figure 8(b)) is completed
without any mention of security. Due to the extreme potential for malicious actions enabled
by MCE and RAC attacks–which are thus enabled through MCP tools–we note the need
for reliable guardrails for potentially malicious attacks. However, Figure 7 shows another
example where Claude refuses an MCE attack after its guardrails are triggered (and despite
the user escalating the severity of the request), whereas Figure 9 shows an intimidating
RAC attack request which partially triggers Claude’s guardrails but is completed.
Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct. Figure 2 shows an MCE attack attempt successfully carried out
by Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct. While Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct displays knowledge of po-
tential malicious use cases related to the request–suggesting guardrails were partially
triggered–the request is nonetheless completed. This is also true for alternative MCE at-
tempts (Figure 16(b)). However, both RAC (Figure 15) and multiple CT (Figure 17) requests
3

Preprint. Under review.
(a) Claude refuses an MCE attack hidden as octal.
(b) Claude executes a very direct MCE attack.
Figure 1: Claude refusing and executing commands which enable a remote execution
attack. In Figure 1(a), Claude proceeds with caution by first decoding the octal values,
notes the security risks inherent in the request’s decoded command, and correctly refuses.
However, Claude executes the less deceptive request, where the command to establish a
remote execution attack is passed in plaintext and added to the user’s run configuration
file.
4

Preprint. Under review.
are completed without any returned security concerns, suggesting these requests did not
partially trigger Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct’s guardrails (unlike Claude).
Figure 2: Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct completes an MCE attack request.
Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct shows its guardrails are being partially triggered by not-
ing malicious use cases for this command, but nonetheless completes the request. The
request is highlighted in purple, while the salient portions of Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct’s
response are highlighted in orange. The original unhighlighted image, as well as another
completed MCE attack request, may be found in Figure 16.
Unlike Claude, Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct refusals for MCE, RAC, and CT attack-requests
required explicit harmful/unsafe language, as displayed in Figure 19 (for RAC attacks) and
Figure 18 (for MCE and CT attacks). The only difference between the refused and com-
pleted prompts is a phrase in the latter explicitly stating one of the following words/phrases:
“hack,” “steal,” “backdoor,” and “break into.” We note that, in practice, attackers are unlikely
to overtly state their intentions, but rather much more likely to manipulate their targets with
whatever language is required to achieve their goal (Valeriano et al., 2018; Workman, 2008).
Furthermore, we note that Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct underwent extensive safety alignment
and cybersecurity evaluation (Grattafiori et al., 2024). Thus, despite rigorous testing on
previous (non-MCP related) safety benchmarks, Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct (and likely other
LLMs) require re-evaluation given the immediate safety-and-security implications of en-
abling LLMs with MCP tools. In particular, if an MCP-enabled application was solely using
Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct and was equipped with the MCP filesystem server, the system
might allow MCE, RAC, and CT attacks so long as a bad actor does not use harmful or
unsafe language.
4 Retrieval-Agent Deception Attacks
We have shown that both Claude and Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct enabled with MCP servers
are susceptible to MCE, RAC, and CT attacks when directly prompted. We introduce a new
attack for MCP-enabled agentic workflows, wherein the LLM is not directly prompted with
the MCP-leveraging attack. Rather, the attacker corrupts publicly available data, which end
up on the MCP-enabled user’s system and which the user adds to a vector database. The
data has been corrupted with MCP-leveraging attack commands centered around a specific
theme so that, when the MCP user asks to query this database for info related to this theme,
the attacker’s commands are loaded and run. We thus call this a Retrieval-Agent DEception
(RADE) attack, which is illustrated in Figure 3. As the attacker no longer needs direct access
to the victim’s system, RADE has a significantly higher threat level than the direct prompt
attacks (DPA) demonstrated in Section 3.
Given a system enabled with the MCP servers listed in Table 2, we demonstrate an end-
to-end RADE attack for CT using Claude Desktop . In it, an attacker has corrupted a
file–centered around the theme “MCP” with commands to search for any environment
5

Preprint. Under review.
Attacker
Public files
MCP user
Search my files for X,
use MCP servers for
search results
X Y Z
Figure 3: Threat model for a RADE attack. An attacker compromises publicly available
data with targeted commands centered around a specific theme (“X” in the figure), which
ends up on an MCP user’s system. Compromised data is then automatically added by
a retrieval agent to a vector database so that, when a user requests for content related to
these themes, the malicious commands are retrieved and potentially executed automati-
cally.
variables containing “OpenAI” or “HuggingFace” and export these over Slack–which ends
up on the MCP-user’s system. The user forms a vector database out of their files using the
Chroma MCP server and tells Claude to query the database for “MCP” and run the results.
Claude subsequently uses the Chroma MCP server to run the query, then the everything
MCP server to search for “OpenAI” and “HuggingFace” environment variables, finds API
keys for both, and finally posts a company-wide Slack notification exposing both the victim’s
OpenAI and HuggingFace API keys. The successful attack is displayed in Figure 4.
A second successful RADE attack–for RAC using Claude Desktop –is displayed in Figure 10
and 11. Similar to the previous RADE attack, an attacker has compromised a file centered
around the theme “MCP ,” but this time stating commands to add anssh key to the victim’s
local authorized keys file. The attack proceeds as before, where after the user tells Claude
to query the database for “MCP” and run the results, Claude uses the Chroma MCP server
to run the query and the filesystem MCP server to create the authorized keys file with the
attacker’s ssh keys, thus granting immediate access to the victim’s system.
5 McpSafetyScanner - Multi-Agentic Framework for Proactive MCP
Vulnerability Detection and Remediation
We have thus seen several malicious system attacks made possible by querying Claude or
Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct connected to MCP servers. Furthermore, we have seen that, while
the LLM’s guardrails may be triggered by MCE, RAC, or CT attacks, refusal of the related
requests are not guaranteed (especially for Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct). Thus, to add security
beyond just an LLM’s guardrails to MCP-enabled systems, we introduce McpSafetyScanner.
Given an arbitrary MCP server, McpSafetyScanner uses agents to automatically probe the
system environment and actions enabled by the server for vulnerabilities and subsequent
remediations. Depicted in Figure 5, this entire process is carried out in three key stages.
The first stage consists of automated vulnerability detection, wherein a hacker agent auto-
matically pulls down an MCP server’s features (i.e., tools, resources, and prompts), then
determines system vulnerabilities using these features. The second stage consists of an
expanded vulnerability search and remediation, wherein, for each (tool, resource, prompt,
vulnerability) tuple, a security auditor agent searches several knowledge bases (i.e., the
World Wide Web, arXiv, and Hacker News) for similar vulnerabilities. For each determined
vulnerability, the auditor thus determines remediation steps and best practices for an MCP
developer to mitigate these exploits. The final stage consists of the security report genera-
tion, wherein a supervisor agent consolidates all vulnerabilities and remediations to produce
a detailed report.
6

Preprint. Under review.
(a) RADE attack file for CT centered around the theme “MCP .”
(b) Claude is successfully coerced to perform a RADE attack using available MCP servers, exporting
the user’s OpenAI and Huggingface to a Slack channel. RadBlog is a Slack app which notifies all
Slack users in the organization after posting.
Figure 4: Successful RADE attack for CT: From a vector database including CT direc-
tions themed around “MCP ,”Claude is instructed to search for entries about the MCP and
perform related actions. Claude complies, completing a RAC attack and providing attack-
ers access to the victim’s system. Conversation is condensed for brevity, full conversation
is displayed in Figure 10 and 11.
Tools = { MCP Server tools }
Role = “Hacker”
Goals = {“Probe system using
tools and server
resources” ,
“Return discovered
vulnerabilities” ,
}

Tools = { Web, ArXiv, }
Role = “Auditor”
Goals = {“for each (tool, prompt,
resource, vulnerability):
-Find related vulnerabilities”,
“Find/determine
remediations for all
learned vulnerabilities”,
}

Hacker
News Tools = { Hacker, Auditor}
Role = “Supervisor”
Goals = {“Monitor other agents,
keep them on task” ,
“Produce a detailed
security report” ,
}

Stage 1 – MCP server vulnerability
detection
Stage 2 – Detect related vulnerabilities,
determine remediations
Stage 3 – Generate a detailed security
report of vulnerabilities and remediations
Figure 5: Steps and agents used by the McpSafetyScanner to detect MCP server vulnera-
bilities and determine remediations.
7

Preprint. Under review.
Thus, an MCP developer or user inputs the configuration file defining their MCP
servers and args in json format (e.g., claude desktop config.json for Claude Desktop ),
and McpSafetyScanner returns a report of its security findings. We present two
McpSafetyScanner reports produced by scanning the configuration of MCP servers con-
sidered herein (Table 2). McpSafetyScanner is fast (runtime of less than one minute to scan
and generate each report on an M2 Max MacBook Pro) and, most importantly, accurate; the
first report (displayed in Figure 20) catches exploits used in the demonstrated MCE, RAC,
and CT attacks. Furthermore, the remediation steps enable the developer to strengthen the
guardrails of the underlying MCP server, as well as the end-user to strengthen the defenses
of the system (while hosting the MCP server).
For example, for RAC, McpSafetyScanner correctly notes the abuse possibility of ssh keys
being added to a user’s authorized keys file (while also noting other possible system paths
for this attack). The provided remediation–“implement strict file access permissions”–
provides a path for a downstream MCP user to protect their system from this exploit, while
the second remediation–“Monitor file access and modifications”–provides a means with
which MCP developers can place guardrails on their deployed server (i.e., monitor the files
accessed during LLM-MCP server exchanges and prevent access to sensitive system files).
Furthermore, the report includes commandline examples of each attack. A summary of the
report is available in Table 1, where the exploits used to achieve the attacks demonstrated
herein are described and accompanied by remediations.
Table 1: Summary of McpSafetyScanner findings from jointly scanning the MCP servers in
Table 2
Attack Description Remediation
MCE An attacker could use the
edit file and write file func-
tions to inject malicious code
or backdoors into critical files,
leading to unauthorized access
or privilege escalation.
Implement strict access controls
and monitoring for file modifica-
tions. Restrict directories where
these functions can operate. Moni-
tor changes to critical files using file
integrity tools (Linux Tripwire)
RAC Attackers can add their
own public SSH keys to
∼/.ssh/authorized keys, gain-
ing unauthorized access.
Use strict permissions on
authorized keys
CT Attackers can print and cap-
ture environment variables to
access sensitive data, such as
API keys, internal URLs, and
credentials.
Avoid storing sensitive information
in environment variables. Enforce
least privilege principles.
CT Exploit the Slack API to exfil-
trate data or cause unautho-
rized posts.
Audit and restrict API access, and
regularly review channel permis-
sions. Use Slack’s advanced secu-
rity features (Slack Security Best
Practices).
6 Discussion, Conclusions, and Future Work
Although only a handful of months old, the MCP shows significant promise in lowering the
connectivity barriers between agentic components. Furthermore, the rapid adaptation over a
short period of time point to the protocol’s potential to truly become the “USB-C port for AI
applications” (Anthropic, 2025f). However, with rapid adaptation also comes the increased
potential for the abuse of existing safety vulnerabilities. In order to initiate the understanding
of such MCP vulnerabilities, herein, we’ve studied three serious attacks, ranging in their
impact from exfiltration of sensitive information to remote access control of the server’s
host. We’ve shown that both Claude and Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct are susceptible to all
three attacks. We’ve also introduced a new multi-MCP server attack with a high threat
8

Preprint. Under review.
level, RADE, and shown that Claude may enable CT or RAC under this attack. Furthermore,
we’ve shown that the guardrails of both models may be triggered during these attacks, but
the reliability of these guardrails to prevent these attacks (via a refusal on the part of the
LLM) varies drastically based on the model as well as the prompt used to deliver the attack.
To aid in strengthening the guardrails of the MCP server and the hosting system (thus
relieving the LLM of the sole burden of refusal), we’ve introduced an agentic tool,
McpSafetyScanner, to automatically scan MCP servers for vulnerabilities and provide re-
mediations. We’ve shown that McpSafetyScanner is capable of catching the exploits which
have enabled the attacks considered herein, and provides quick actionable remediations to
close MCP-enabled exploits on either the developer’s or MCP-user’s side. We are actively
working to release this tool so that MCP server vulnerabilities may be scanned and patched
prior to deployment, thus decreasing zero-day exploits and any abuse unintentionally
enabled by MCP servers.
There is significant room for future work. We plan to continue auditing existing MCP
servers in order to patch existing vulnerabilities. Furthermore, we plan to work towards
partnering closely with the active MCP community, in order to automate safety scanning
prior to deployment using McpSafetyScanner.
7 Experimental Setup
Claude Desktop was run using Claude for Mac v0.8.1 on macOS Sequoia v15.3.2 .
McpSafetyScanner was written in Agno (v1.2.6), with each agent powered by
gpt-4o-2024-08-0 for all results presented. All Llama-3.3-70B-Instruct results were run
using mcp v1.1.2 , huggingface-hub v0.29.3 , and 1.68.2, where inference calls were made
using HuggingFace’s inference API. GNU netcat v0.7.1 was used for all related results. All
considered MCP servers are listed in Table 2 with their associated tools listed in Table 3. The
Claude Desktop config file of all MCP servers used for all attacks is available in Section A.
Table 2: MCP servers considered herein. Filesystem, Slack, and everything servers are
natively packged with current versions of Claude Desktop . All considered servers are
hosted in the official MCP github repository (Anthropic, 2025e).
MCP Server Description
Filesystem (Anthropic, 2025c) MCP for filesystem operations (.e.g,
read, write, make directory, etc.)
Slack (Anthropic, 2025g) MCP for the Slack API, enabling Claude
to interact with Slack workspaces
Everything (Anthropic, 2025b) Test server for builders of Client servers
Chroma (Chroma, 2025) Server enabling data retrieval ca-
pabilities powered by Chroma
8 Acknowledgements
We thank Leidos for funding this research through the Office of Technology. Approved for
public release 25-LEIDOS-0318-29149.
